

--- PAGE 1 ---

Forensic implications of respiratory derived blood spatter distributions
David Denison a, Alice Porter b, Matthew Mills c, Robert C. Schroter d,*
a Royal Brompton Hospital and National Heart & Lung Institute, Sidney Street, London SW3 6NT, United Kingdom
b Cody Technology Park, Ively Park, Farnborough, Hants GU51 4QS, United Kingdom
c Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham NO47 2UH, United Kingdom
d Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
1. Introduction
Scenes of violent crime are frequently associated with blood
spatter. The patterns of spatter are often attributed to impact
spatter, movements of the victim or assailant or cast off from a
weapon. However, some blood may have originated from the
respiratory system and been distributed by mechanisms that
follow different physical processes and the observed distributions
may require to be interpreted in a different way. Furthermore, it is
possible for such aerosols to be produced some time after death
when liquid blood is still present. Founding fathers of pathology,
such as Morgagni, Hunter and Virchow knew that, after violent
death, often blood did not clot and acted as if it contained a
ﬁbrinolysin, although these facts are sometimes overlooked in
modern times. This paper analyses these phenomena and discusses
their implications.
Theobjective was to develop a scientiﬁcally based understanding
of the probable behaviour of airborne respired blood aerosols and
whether, ornot, theobservedamountanddistributionofbloodspots
on clothing of a murder suspect could possibly be the result of
respired blood as opposed to impact spattered blood [1–6]. We have
been unable to ﬁnd any clear explanations in the forensic science
literature or textbooks which provided a reliable scientiﬁcally based
description of the processes involved in creating respired blood
aerosols from the nose or mouth, or indeed puncture wounds to the
chest, of the physical mechanisms underlying their ﬂight char-
acteristics, or how spots of respired blood captured on clothing
might be distinguished from, or confused with, spots originating
from other sources, particularly impact spatter.
A number of simple human and physical model experiments
were undertaken that could be considered to be a reasonable
representation of real situations. Studies were performed that
could relate to the expulsion of blood from the nose or mouth by
the conscious action of a subject, or be
caused to occur
involuntarily by a subject, alive or dead. It is appreciated that
the studies reported here may be of relevance, not only to respired
aerosols via the nose or mouth, but, to the production and fate of
blood aerosols derived from expiration of air via puncture wounds
to the upper airway, trachea or chest [7,8].
In this paper, we consider ﬁrst the experimental studies we
undertook and then relate these to the known physical processes
relating to airﬂow generated aerosols. Whilst the experimental
studies demonstrate that exhaled aerosols can potentially travel
distances in excess of 1 m, the general question of their motion
over greater distances was not explored; this was because the
ﬂight characteristics are strongly dependent on the exhalation
airﬂow properties and these are can vary greatly. A deﬁnitive study
of the motion to greater distances would involve a considerable
research project in its own right, beyond the scope of the principal
focus of the present work.
Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 3 August 2009
Received in revised form 13 January 2010
Accepted 24 May 2010
Available online 18 June 2010
Keywords:
Respired blood spatter
Respirated blood droplet size
Blood pattern analysis
Exhaled blood aerosol transport
Chest stab wounds
A B S T R A C T
The nature of blood aerosols produced in physiological studies of an upright subject expiring small
volumes through straws, spitting and mouthing sounds, and a semi-prone subject spitting through a
bloody mouth or snorting through a single nasal oriﬁce and by a simpliﬁed physical model of the
respiratory system were investigated. Each manoeuvre produced many hundreds of droplets of a range
of size, the vast majority being less than 1 mm diameter. Droplets under 1 mm dia. travelled over 1 m –
much further than could be expected if their ﬂight was ballistic, like that of impact spatter. Respired
blood aerosol properties are explained in terms of established mechanics of airﬂow shear induced
aerosol production and the ﬂuid mechanics of exhaled air movement.
 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 20 7594 5175.
E-mail addresses: d.denison@rbht.nhs.uk (D. Denison), vaporter@qinetiq.com
(A. Porter), m.mills@nuh.nhs.uk (M. Mills), r.schroter@imperial.ac.uk
(R.C. Schroter).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forsciint
0379-0738/$ – see front matter  2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.forsciint.2010.05.017


--- PAGE 2 ---

2. Experimental studies of respiratory generated blood
aerosols
Environmental airﬂow patterns are a matter to be considered
when designing experiments such as those undertaken. The room
used was without any form of artiﬁcial ventilation and there was
no detectable airﬂow through gaps around the edge of the door,
which itself was well removed from the experiment. Thermally
induced movement of air up or down walls and the like – though it
can never be totally eliminated – was minimal. The air movement
speeds of the experiment were very considerably greater than any
such perturbing air ﬂows. We were completely satisﬁed that there
were no signiﬁcant extraneous air movements within the room
and any very slow motions had no detectable inﬂuence on the
experiments. Whilst conducting the experiments, the investigators
took great care not to move their arms or legs as additional
precaution against the introduction of unwanted air movement.
The experiments involved the transport of droplets larger than
somewhat smaller than 0.1 mm diameter – that is with settling
velocities greater than around 0.25 m s1.
2.1. Study 1: pufﬁng through short, blood coated straws in an upright
posture
Whilst in a seated position, a fully conscious normal human
subject (author DD) gently puffed a brief exhalation through a
hand-held, short, lightly blood-stained, drinking straw oriented
horizontally. The straws were either 5.3 cm or 3.3 cm in length and
6 mm internal diameter.
Before each exhalation, the inner surface of the straw was
lightly coated in the subject’s own freshly drawn venous blood by
dipping, tapping the straw free of all but a thin ﬁlm of blood on the
inside and wiping the straw clean on the outside. The retained
volume of blood was estimated, but not measured, to be approx.
0.15 ml or 10 standard drops of blood.
The typical puff volume, of approx. 50 ml, was estimated as
follows. The subject inhaled maximally to total lung capacity and
then performed the puff repeatedly until he reached residual lung
volume; both these standard lung volumes are known for the
subject. Dividing this total exhaled volume by the number of puffs
gave the average individual puff volume.
The exhaled blood aerosol was captured on a vertical, A1
(841 mm  594 mm) sized, paper target placed 1 m from the
mouth; the paper readily absorbed ink pen writing and also
impinging blood droplets. The target provided an interception cone
of approx. 308  458 from the source. Inspection of the deposition
patterns of incident droplets always indicated a focus of spots
towards the centre of the target, with virtually none near its edges
– strongly suggesting that, in essence, all droplets travelling the
notional target distance were captured on it. The spot counts were
then determined as described for Study 2.
The experiment was performed 10 times for each size of straw.
Each manoeuvre was performed making a quiet effort whilst
producing a peak mouth pressure, on average, of less than approx.
25 mm Hg.
Mouth
pressure
measurements
were
made
as
explained in Study 2 below.
2.2. Study 2: mouthing sounds and words in the upright seated
posture through a bloody mouth
The principal object of this study was to determine whether or
not an upright seated subject, when expressing a voiceless ‘P’ or ‘S’
with a blood stained mouth, would generate blood spatters on a
vertical target placed in front of the face.
The subject introduced 1 ml of his own freshly drawn venous
blood into his mouth to coat the mucosal surfaces both in front of,
and behind, the teeth, for subsequent exhalation via the mouth.
The resulting aerosolised droplets were partially captured by an
upright A1 size paper target placed approx. 1 m from the face – as
described for Study 1. The exhalation protocol was to voicelessly
expel a ‘P’ (or ‘per’) causing the lips to part transiently or an ‘S’ (or
‘esse’) through pursed lips and closely opposed teeth with the
tongue forward close to the palate. Only a small volume of air
(approx. 50 ml) was required to produce each sound. The
manoeuvres were all performed whilst making a quiet effort with
peak mouth pressures typically less than 15 mm Hg, as measured
by the method described below. Ten runs, each with a clean mouth
and fresh instillation of blood, were conducted for each sound.
Following every run, the blood spots on the target were allowed to
dry and then each spot visible to the trained naked eye was circled
with a pen and counted. Spots of a diameter greater than 1 mm
were recorded separately.
In both mouth and nose studies (Studies 2 and 3), the subject
spat or blew out the remaining blood. This method, whilst simple,
was sufﬁcient to remove all but a thin coating of blood on the tissue
lining – such a residual volume of blood was small in comparison to
that added for each experiment.
Additionally, mouth pressure was recorded as the subject
uttered a series of ‘‘PISS off’s’’ (with particular emphasis on the ﬁrst
word) of moderate intensity. These words are built up from lip
movements closely resembling the primary forms involved in
forming a ‘P’ or ‘S’. The object was to determine if the combined
actions reﬂected those of the fundamentals.
For reasons of blood contamination and to avoid distortion of
the mouth with the pressure line, it was considered inappropriate
to measure mouth pressure during the actual expiration of blood in
Studies 1 and 2. In a separate experiment, performed immediately
beforehand, a fast responding, under damped, pressure transducer
(1.16 kHz damped natural frequency, with better than 99%
amplitude response and 08 phase shift at 100 Hz) was placed in
the subject’s mouth with the sampling point located just behind
the teeth and the pressure recorded whilst performing repeated
manoeuvres of the same nature as those used in the blood ejection
experiments. The pressure recordings were made for a series of
quiet, moderate and vigorous exhalations.
2.3. Study 3: spitting, or nasal snorting, of instilled blood in the semi-
prone posture
Studies 1 and 2 involved a subject in an upright posture. It is of
interest to know whether or not a subject lying on the ground could
produce a respired blood aerosol with similar trajectories and how
it might be captured on a target observer some distance from the
source.
Experiments were performed by the same subject (author
DD) as in Studies 1 and 2, using only moderate effort, either
spitting through loosely clenched teeth, or snorting blood
through the single right nostril whilst lying stretched out and
semi-prone on his left side. Before each exhalation, 2 ml of his
own freshly drawn venous blood was instilled into his mouth or
nostril; remaining blood was removed before the following run
as explained under Study 2. Positioned close to the semi-prone
subject was an observer (author MM) acting as a target, kneeling
on the left knee with left arm outstretched onto the middle back
of the lying subject and fully covered in conventional scene of
crime overalls of surface brushed, open weave polypropylene
fabric.
Three series of runs, of 5 runs each, were conducted in total.
Series (A): the subject exhaled via his right nostril, with the
observer kneeling at arms length and square on to the face of
the prone body.
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
145


--- PAGE 3 ---

Series (B): the subject again exhaled via his right nostril, with
the observer kneeling at arms length but at the level of the chest
of the prone body, and facing and rotated towards the head.
Series (C): the subject and observer were placed as in Series A,
but the blood was expelled from the mouth.
All participants (the authors of this article) gave their fully
informed consent before undertaking each of the above studies (1–
3). All runs in Studies 1–3 were video recorded.
2.4. Study 4: use of a simpliﬁed physical nose model
The above physiological studies, whilst containing the essential
biological relevance, were not entirely controllable or reproduc-
ible. Therefore, it was decided to devise an idealised physical nose
model and experiment which, though it might potentially be
criticised for its extreme simplicity and remoteness from the real
biological situation, could be more clearly deﬁned and controlled.
The model (Fig. 1a) consisted of a short, 4.5 or 6.0 mm diameter
plastic tube representing the nasal valve and more external parts of
the nose, connected to a large volume syringe representing the
lung via a simpliﬁed representation of the nasal cavity (consisting
of a ﬂat chamber of two parallel diamond-shaped Perspex plates)
and tubing representing the major airways (Fig. 1b).
Three drops of fresh human venous blood (total volume approx.
0.045 ml) were instilled into the nasal valve, or nasal cavity, at one
of the three positions shown (Fig. 1b). A controlled, small volume of
air was then rapidly expelled through the system by dropping a
weight onto the syringe plunger, depressing it in approx. 0.1 s and
generating a peak transient pressure within the syringe of less than
approx. 15 mm Hg. This exhalation of air always caused an aerosol
of blood to be expelled through the nasal tube. Air volumes as small
as 62.5 ml were exhaled from the model. This was not the lower
limit of volume capable of aerosolising blood, simply it was the
smallest volume tested; even this small volume produced copious
spots on the targets. The resulting blood droplets were captured on
paper surfaces placed horizontally 20 cm beneath the model and
vertically at a distance of 50 cm (Fig. 1a). Over 80 individual
experiments were performed with the nasal tubes pointing
horizontally or inclined upwards at an angle of 308 or 458.
3. Results
3.1. Pufﬁng through short, blood coated straws in an upright posture
The peak pressures recorded whilst pufﬁng through dry straws
(Fig. 2) ranged from approx. 20 to 30 mm Hg and each puff lasted
approx. 0.5 s. On average, a 3.3 cm straw generated 244 captured
droplets and a 5.3 cm straw generated 298 such droplets (Fig. 3).
The spot size ranges were comparable to those found in the study
of mouthing sounds (Study 2).
[(Fig._1)TD$FIG]
Fig. 1. The physical model used in Study 4. (a) General view and detailed features of the experimental setup and (b) detailed view of the model nasal cavity and valve showing
the nature of the resultant aerosol depending on the site of placement of the instilled blood.
[(Fig._2)TD$FIG]
Fig. 2. Typical mouth pressure–time tracing during simulation of pufﬁng on a straw
to expel blood as described in the text.
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
146


--- PAGE 4 ---

To investigate if the effort, as judged by the video recorded
sound level associated with expelling the blood, was a good
indicator of the number of droplets captured, the sound level, as
judged by ear listening to the video playback, was ranked as high,
medium or low for each run. The number of spots in each run, thus
ranked for sound level, is given in Fig. 4.
3.2. Mouthing sounds and words in the upright seated posture
through a bloody mouth
The number of spots of blood captured on the target for each
run is shown in Table 1. On average, each ‘P’ produced 271
captured spots of which 2 were more than 1 mm dia.; each ‘S’
produced 313 captured spots of which 4 were more than 1 mm dia.
For the 10 ‘P’ runs, a total of 2060 spots were recorded including 16
large spots – that is 1 large spot per 128 small spots. For the ‘S’ runs,
there were 43 large spots in a total of 3196 – that is 1 large spot per
73 small spots.
Note that the quiet ‘P’ sounds, used in the experiments with
blood, were associated with rapidly developed peak pressures
(Fig. 5) of less than 15 mm Hg; moderate sounds involved peak
pressures of around 25 mm Hg and the loudest ones were
associated with peak pressures of less than 35 mm Hg. In all cases
the manoeuvre was effectively impulsive, lasting for approx. 1 s,
and pressure fell rapidly at the end.
The pressure recordings for an ‘S’ were of a different shape
(Fig. 6), with an initial rapid rise to the peak value followed by a
progressive fall through the remainder of the manoeuvre as the
sound was released and sustained. The tracings to the right of the
dotted line in Fig. 6 were representative of the quiet manoeuvres
produced
in
Study
2,
involving
peak
pressures
of
approx.
10 mm Hg.
In uttering the two words (‘‘PISS off’’), a complex pressure
waveform was produced (Fig. 7). The initial sounding of a ‘P’ was
associated with a rapid rise in pressure to around 30 mm Hg or
more with a subsequent rapid fall off; this was then followed
immediately by a second, but less emphatic peak as the ‘ISS’ was
enunciated. The ‘off’ involved a disconnected small amplitude
pressure wave of less than 10 mm Hg for all utterances. The
pressures associated with each of the component sounds were
similar to those measured for the individual components as noted
in Figs. 5 and 6.
[(Fig._3)TD$FIG]
Fig. 3. Number of exhaled droplets of blood expelled from a straw captured on a
target placed approx. 1 m horizontally from the mouth. (a) Straw length = 3.3 cm.
(b) Straw length = 5.3 cm.
[(Fig._4)TD$FIG]
Fig. 4. Ranking of the captured droplet numbers reported in Fig. 3 based on observed
sound level linked to the manoeuvre as described in the text.
Table 1
Captured droplet numbers on targets placed 1 m in front of the subject.
Run
Voiceless quiet ‘P’
Voiceless quiet ‘S’
Total no.
No. >1 mm
Total no.
No. >1 mm
1
323
2
1*
0*
2
191
0
550
2
3
83
1
204
0
4
420
0
40
7
5
389
0
199
11
6
292
3
34
2
7
338
8
297
2
8
42
0
1139
6
9
117
0
256
2
10
164
2
377
10
* Note: this run involved a misﬁre.
[(Fig._5)TD$FIG]
Fig. 5. Mouth pressure recordings for a series of ‘P’s made with differing intensity.
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
147


--- PAGE 5 ---

3.3. Spitting, or nasal snorting, of instilled blood in the semi-prone
posture
The average total numbers of spots on the overalls for each type
of manoeuvre are shown in Fig. 8. In all experiments, the great
majority of spots were less, or much less, than 1 mm diameter.
Spots were widely distributed on the overalls, but especially to the
left arm and chest in the nasal exhalations; they were biased to the
hips and thighs and the right leg for the spitting exhalations; this
probably reﬂected differences in the primary direction of the
exhaled stream.
In Series A, the bulk of the spots were on the left forearm which
appeared to shield the remaining body regions and the left chest
took a reasonable density of droplet hits, the remainder of the body
was relatively balanced between left and right sided hits. In Series
B, the target was moved down from more the face level to chest
level and it would appear that the heaviest capture density was left
chest to waist. The target had possibly moved more into the ﬁring
line of the nasal exhalation, which would be expected to be more in
this direction than in Series A. This would also explain the
generally higher total counts overall. In Series C, the mouth spit
would have been expected to be more directed to the target than
was the case for Series A with nasal exhalations. The distribution
was relatively balanced left to right.
The deposition distributions in the three series relate reason-
ably to the relative positioning and means of exhalation. The fact
that the nearer body parts often had the highest spot counts did not
diminish the explicitly recorded observation that signiﬁcant
numbers of spots were found on the more distant body regions
that were in line with the exhalation and not shielded by other
parts, more proximal to the source.
3.4. Use of a simpliﬁed physical nose model
Drops of blood, placed at the distal tip of the nasal tube (Fig. 1,
position 1), tended to be propelled only a short distance on
exhalation, producing only a small amount of spray. The moment
the exhalation was initiated, a small amount of spray was
produced, blood predominantly fell out of the tube to the ground
below creating a few splashes several millimetres diameter.
When blood was instilled approx. 1 cm behind the tip (position
2), a different pattern of elimination was observed. The blood ﬁlm
surface was torn by the airﬂow and the expelled droplets
transported along with the exhaled air. In all cases, the vertical
target surface intercepted many hundreds of very small droplets,
producing spots typically much less than 0.5 mm diameter, many
being less than 0.1 mm dia., along with some larger spots. Some
spots, mainly larger ones, were also detected on the horizontal
target surface. When the nasal tube was inclined upwards, the
interception distance was observed to be greater than 1 m for
many droplets, both small and large.
When blood was instilled further back within the cavity
(position 3), the blood ﬁlm was again torn by the emerging airﬂow
into droplets of a range of sizes. However, the larger droplets
tended to impact on the walls of the cavity upstream of the valve,
leaving a stream of smaller droplets to emerge as before,
generating a pattern of interception on the vertical target of
almost entirely small spots with comparatively few being observed
on the horizontal target.
3.5. General
Whilst the diameter of the droplets producing the individual
spots could not be measured directly, the captured blood wetted
the paper surface and thus spread to cover an area larger than the
originating droplet; in consequence, the measured spot sizes were
certainly larger than the droplet diameter.
The typical speed of the exhaled air package varied considerably
between the four studies on the basis of the estimated exhaled
volumes and periods. The transient maximum air speed in the
model studies could have been as high as 20 m s1. This may be
compared with an estimated speed of around 3.5 m s1 in the
straw pufﬁng study or about 2 m s1 in the upright spitting and
prone mouth exhalations, assuming a pursed lip and teeth
conﬁguration providing an oriﬁce of about 3 cm  0.1 cm. The
prone nasal study, assuming an oriﬁce similar to the straws, would
generate a typical exhaled air speed nearer 2 m s1.
In a separate unpublished study, we ﬁlmed initial blood droplet
ejection speeds produced by aggressive hitting of a hand-held
heavy metal bar on a bloody surface designed to model the human
skull. The study design and choice of weapon were determined by
the wish to replicate a possible alternative scenario causing the
[(Fig._6)TD$FIG]
Fig. 6. Mouth pressure recordings for a series of ‘S’s of varying intensity. The
recordings to the right of the dotted line were chosen to mimic the utterances used
in the blood spatter experiments described in the text.
[(Fig._7)TD$FIG]
Fig. 7. Mouth pressure recordings for a series of ‘PISS off’s of varying intensity.
[(Fig._8)TD$FIG]
Fig. 8. Exhaled blood spatter patterns on an observer near to a semi-prone subject.
Series A: subject exhaled via right nostril, observer kneeling at arms length and
square on to face of prone body. Series B: subject exhaled via right nostril, observer
kneeling at arms length at chest level of prone body, facing and rotated towards the
head. Series C: the two bodies were placed as in Series A, but the blood was exhaled
from the mouth.
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
148


--- PAGE 6 ---

observed pattern of blood spatter on the clothing of the murder
suspect [1–5]. The initial velocity of this impact spatter blood was
measured (from frame by frame video analysis) to be in the region
of 4 m s1. For purposes of comparison as developed below in the
present paper, it has been assumed that an aerosol may be expelled
by either impact or respiratory processes at an initial speed of
5 m s1.
4. Underlying physical processes
4.1. Formation of blood aerosols
The formation of liquid droplet sprays, or aerosols, by the action
of air moving over a liquid surface is exceedingly commonplace.
Sprays formed by the passage of wind over water surfaces,
cosmetics sprays, therapeutic inhaled liquid aerosols, atomisation
of fuel in combustion engines and boilers, industrial paint and
agricultural sprays are all examples of the process, as are
respiratory derived
water aerosols resulting from sneezing,
coughing or spitting. In all cases, the airﬂow entrains drops with
a spectrum of diameters. In most industrial situations, great care is
taken to attempt to control the size range and concentration of the
resultant droplets.
Despite the ubiquitous nature and importance of such aerosols,
the underlying physical processes determining their formation are
not well understood other than at the descriptive level. Mathe-
matical modelling of the process is still very much a challenge at
the detailed level (e.g. Ref. [9]) and beyond the scope of this paper.
One of the principal objectives of much research endeavour is to
explain the mechanics of water aerosol formation by the action of
airﬂow, however the same physical laws and processes apply to the
formation of blood aerosols when resulting from the action of the
ﬂow of air over a blood wetted surface. The relevant physical
properties of blood at 37 8C (particularly the bulk viscosity
{plasma:
1.2 mN s m2,
blood
3–4 mN s m2}
[10];
density:
1.05  103 kg m3
[11];
surface
tension:
0.055–0.075 N m1
[11]) are not identical to water, but they are functionally similar
and the aerosolisation processes of blood can be considered in the
same way. The two phase nature of blood at the microscopic level
would not be expected to be of signiﬁcance as it is at a much
smaller scale than that of the process of interest, just as is the case
with spray production of multiphase liquids such as paint or solid–
liquid slurries.
The formation of a spray of water or blood can be thought of in a
number of stages, all of which occur very rapidly in a time of the
order of a millisecond. The whole process is driven by the shearing
force at the interface of the air ﬂowing over the stationary or
relatively slow moving liquid surface [9,12,13]. The wall shear
force causes an instability in the liquid surface that is manifested
ﬁrst as ripples in the surface; these develop rapidly into deeper
waves that over-crest and give rise to ligaments of liquid that are
pulled out by the friction of the airstream. The wind generation of
waves on the surface of a pond is an easily recognisable example of
the process.
As a ligament stretches, it thins and ultimately breaks up into
several blobs which are rapidly pulled into spherical droplets of a
range of diameters, but with a statistically reproducible size
distribution [9,14] which is strongly dependent on the liquid
density, viscosity and surface tension, but less so on air velocity.
The droplet size distribution is likely to range from larger than
1 mm to less than 0.05 mm in diameter.
4.2. Flight characteristics of respiratory blood aerosols
Gentle oral or nasal exhalation of a small puff, or package, of
air on a very cold day provide simple examples of both the
considerable distance a quiet breath will travel into a still air
environment and of the retention of very small water droplets
derived from condensation of the water vapour in the breath
within the vortex structure of the exhalate. Even at higher exhaled
ﬂow rates, when the structure is not visually as evident because of
the turbulence in the motion, the same transport mechanisms
apply. Were the very small droplets not carried by the air in this
way, they would come to rest within a few centimetres of the
mouth.
The ﬂight characteristics of aerosols such as respired blood,
entrained in the airﬂow by which they are generated, are
fundamentally different from those whose ballistic ﬂight is caused
by impact or cast off. The entrained aerosol blood droplets,
particularly smaller ones (less than approx. 0.5 mm diameter), will
travel generally with the air in which they are contained [15,16].
The droplet ﬂight paths cannot be predicted in the same way as
droplets – such as impact spatter – ejected into still air.
Because the respired blood droplets are contained within the
exhaled breath, they too travel as a slowly diverging package and
will propagate forwards even through stationary air [15,16]; the
aerosol does not fan out and radiate as widely as it may do for an
impact derived spray of blood. Furthermore, the initial ejection
direction of the respired blood will depend strongly on the nature
and orientation of the conduit (e.g. a normally shaped, or distorted,
mouth, nose or wound) near its outlet and the direction of the
emanating airﬂow in which it is entrained.
The process by which the package of air will fan out and
increase in width progressively with distance is destroyed when
the vortex closely approaches and impinges on a solid wall or
obstruction in its path; the forward motion is stopped abruptly and
the vortex destroyed. The entrained droplets are ejected sideways
to spread over a wider area than that of the unperturbed vortex
[15] so that the area over which droplets will be captured by the
wall is also wider than the air package by which they were
delivered to the obstruction.
4.3. Initial acceleration of droplets within the mouth, nose or a short
straw
Once droplets are stripped off the blood surface, they are pulled
along by the airﬂow as the result of the viscous drag forces due to
the local difference in speed between the droplet and the carrier
air. As they travel along the conduit, they are accelerated towards
the speed of the air, but may not reach it. The extent to which a
droplet will reach the carrier air speed within the conduit will
depend on the droplet size, or inertia, and may be estimated on the
basis of Stokes’ Law for drag on a sphere [17].
If air is travelling within a 6 mm dia. tube at a speed of 10 m s1,
droplets of the size range of interest will increase their velocity
from rest as shown in Fig. 9 as they travel along the conduit. Only
the very smallest 0.01 mm droplets reach the carrier velocity
within a short distance of some 5 mm along the tube; a 0.01 mm
droplet’s behaviour would therefore be essentially uninﬂuenced by
the length of the tube. Larger droplets, even as small as 0.05 mm
dia., continually accelerate along the length of a 30 mm long tube,
though will never reach the carrier air speed; as the differential
between droplet and air speeds reduces, so does the level of the
drag force causing the acceleration. A 0.1 mm droplet will only
have reached less than 40% of the carrier speed by the time it has
travelled 30 mm and a 1.0 mm dia. droplet would attain less than
10% of the air speed. Droplet acceleration will continue for some
distance beyond the conduit exit whilst the local air velocity is
high; once speeds match, the droplets become entrained within
the package and are transported within it.
The acceleration process for small droplets within a conduit
that is far wider than the droplet is viscosity dependent and has no
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
149


--- PAGE 7 ---

relationship to the mechanism by which a peashooter or gun barrel
operates. The latter devices work by the action of high pressure on
the rear of the projectile acting to accelerate it, pushing it along the
tube without signiﬁcant leakage of the propellant gas or air around
the sides of the projectile. The acceleration is continually high
throughout the length of the barrel, not diminishing signiﬁcantly
as the projectile increases speed.
4.4. The ﬂight characteristics of spherical drops ﬁred into still air
A droplet or particle allowed to fall in still air will speed up from
rest in its downward motion due to the force of gravity causing it to
accelerate. However, as the droplet moves through the surround-
ing air, it will experience viscous drag forces acting to slow it down
in the manner described by Stokes’ Law. Ultimately, it will reach a
mathematically predictable constant vertical terminal settling
velocity when the drag and gravitational forces balance.
Very small droplets (0.01 mm diameter, typical of a water
fog)
have
an
exceedingly
small
terminal
settling
velocity
(3  103 m s1). For progressively larger droplets of increasing
mass to surface area ratio, the terminal velocity increases rapidly
with size. Droplets of 0.1 mm dia. (typical of a mist), whilst still
strongly dominated by the viscous effects of the air, have a settling
velocity of the order of 0.3 m s1. 1.0 mm drops (small rain drops)
have a far higher settling velocity of around 30 m s1; their
aerodynamic behaviour is somewhat different from the smaller
ones and they are less vulnerable to any environmental airﬂow
disturbances.
The ﬂight characteristics of spherical drops ﬁred impulsively
into still air, rather than simply dropped, also may be calculated
using well established mathematical ballistic descriptions of their
behaviour. The ﬂight behaviour of spherical, unit density, droplets
of a range of size ﬁred into still air at an initial velocity of 5 m s1 at
angles of 08, 308 or 458 to the horizontal, assuming the viscous drag
force to be described by the classical Stokes’ Law are illustrated in
Fig. 10a and b. The initial trajectory of 458 was chosen as this is very
close to the ideal angle to achieve the maximum horizontal ﬂight
distance of a large drop; greater or lesser angles produce ﬂight
paths of shorter range measured along the horizontal at the level of
ﬁring.
1.0 mm dia. droplets follow a near parabolic trajectory (Fig. 10a)
because their motion is dominated by the effects of gravity; they
can cover signiﬁcant horizontal ranges and also reach signiﬁcant
heights. Their behaviour is near to that of the traditional cricket
ball ﬂight.
Droplets less than approx. 0.5 mm dia. behave very differently
from larger ones. Their ﬂight is progressively attenuated because of
the dominant viscous effects and they travel only very small
distances from the point of ejection. As these droplets reach the
limit of their forward motion, they settle out reaching their
terminal velocity in due course. The horizontal distance reached by
0.1 mm drops, when ﬁred at 5 m s1, is around 10–12 cm whilst
the vertical travel is less than 8 cm (Fig. 10b). Furthermore,
apparently paradoxically, small droplets ﬁred upwards at 308
travel further horizontally than those at 458; this is because they
are not being slowed down as much by drag due to their vertical
motion.
The level of drag exerted on a spherical particle with increasing
velocity appropriately scaled as the Reynolds number (Re) is very
well known (see for example Ref. [17]). Stokes’ Law adequately
deﬁnes the viscous drag on spherical drops or particles travelling at
speeds where the appropriate velocity scaling, or Re, is less than
approx. 1. As Re increases, so the drag law changes through the
intermediate region (for Re in the range of approx. 1–103) to
Newton’s Law for Re in the range 103–105 and the drag is more
than would be expected on the basis of Stokes’ Law, with the
droplet being slowed down more quickly and in a shorter distance
than indicated in the trajectories in Fig. 10a. In the circumstances
of present interest, drops may be travelling at speeds governed by
differing laws at various stages of their ﬂight (thus, for 1.0 mm
drops projected at an initial velocity of 5 m s1, the initial
Re = 350; at the same ejection speed, 0.1 mm drops would have
[(Fig._9)TD$FIG]
Fig. 9. Droplet velocity as a function of distance along a 30 mm long, 6 mm dia. tube
when accelerated by airﬂow with a characteristic speed of 10 m s1.
[(Fig._0)TD$FIG]
Fig. 10. (a) Computed trajectories of 1.0 and 0.1 mm dia. drops ejected at 5 m s1
into still air horizontally and upward at angles of 308 and 458. (b) Expanded scale
showing detailed trajectories of 0.1 and 1 mm droplets for the same conditions as
in (a).
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
150


--- PAGE 8 ---

an Re = 35). However, in all cases the highest Re would be at the
moment of ejection; it would fall rapidly thereafter as the droplet
slowed down and the motion would obey Stokes’ Law for the large
majority of its ﬂight.
The assumption of the universal applicability of Stokes’ Law is
an acceptable approach for the calculations above; they would
overestimate, to a small extent, the distance a droplet would travel
when ﬁred into still air at a speciﬁed initial velocity and vertical
angle. For present purposes, it is important not to underestimate
the distance a drop could travel in still air. By using Stokes’ Law, it is
possible to indicate safely that such droplets could not travel as far
as observed experimentally in our expired blood studies, had they
simply been ‘‘ﬁred’’ into still air by the expiratory process.
5. Discussion
5.1. Fluidity of blood
Care was taken in all the above experimental studies to ensure
that the subject’s own fresh blood had not clotted detectably and
thereby lost some of its ﬂuidity. Blood was used within 5 min of
being drawn, and in the interim period was held in the sterile
plastic syringe into which it had been collected, without the
addition of any anticoagulant. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume
that the physical properties of the blood used in these experiments
were essentially that of blood expelled from a living subject whilst
bleeding. The relevant properties of importance in relation to
aerosol formation would have been essentially normal and not
functionally dissimilar to those of water.
The nature of the process by which respired blood is formed
relies fundamentally upon its ﬂuidity and signiﬁcant clotting
would be very liable to diminish the ability to produce aerosols
containing a dispersion of ﬁne droplets. Expiration would be
expected to shear off less ﬂuid, clotted, structures that were much
larger in size than those observed and the ligament formation and
stretching processes would be compromised with a loss of the
ability to create any signiﬁcant quantity of ﬁne aerosol.
Indeed, it has been generally assumed in the past, by those
analysing blood spatter, that any observed spatter patterns that
might be respired aerosols will have been produced during life, or
within a very short period of time after death. This judgement is
based on the presumed inevitable rapid clotting of the blood which
will have prevented formation of such an aerosol within a short
time after death. The lack of detection of clotted blood in spatter
patterns of possibly respired blood has been taken as self-
supporting evidence for this truism. Conclusions based on this
assumption of the timing of the observed patterns have been used
to eliminate or implicate suspects of crimes. However, it is well
known that blood may, in certain circumstances, retain its ﬂuidity
for very protracted periods of many hours or even days.
Whilst for a long time it was widely accepted by most that the
deceased human may contain blood that is entirely ﬂuid, there was
some dispute as to the truth of this until the work of Morawitz in
1906, as quoted by Mole [18], demonstrated that ﬂuid cadaver
blood was free of ﬁbrinogen and frequently contained a ﬁbrinoly-
sin. Earlier, Virchow in 1871 [as quoted in Ref. [18]], had noted the
very important point that capillary blood in the cadaver is always
ﬂuid and incoagulable. Lenggenhager in 1938 [as quoted in Ref.
[18]], was perhaps the ﬁrst to ask why the blood in a cadaver is
never found completely coagulated.
Mole [18] investigated carefully the conditions which deter-
mine the ﬂuidity of blood in human cadavers as seen at autopsy as
well as the properties of the ﬁbrinolysin found in the blood,
particularly of subjects whose death was sudden and trauma
related. Based on a study of 61 randomly investigated autopsies, he
demonstrated that the more sudden the death, the more likely was
the blood to be found completely ﬂuid. Virtually all the subjects
showing ﬁbinolytic activity could be described as suffering from
shock or cardiovascular collapse whilst still alive; the ﬁbrinolysin
appeared in the blood after death in those who were healthy before
the incident causing their death. He deduced that the ﬁbrinolysin
might be produced by the vascular endothelium, consistent with
the earlier observation of Virchow regarding the incoagulability of
blood in the capillaries.
The work of Mole was subsequently conﬁrmed and extended by
that of Takeichi et al. [19] in the ﬁrst of a series of three papers on
the ﬂuidity of cadaveric blood after sudden death. Amongst other
ﬁndings of forensic interest, they demonstrated that ﬁbrinolysis is
activated by physical exercise or by vasoactive agents such as
adrenaline or noradrenaline [19] and the onset of the short lasting
activation process (of less than 1 min) is very rapid, occurring
within 1 min of secretion of the agent into the blood [20].
It is therefore unsafe to presume the existence of a respired
blood aerosol in relation to a crime can only be explained on the
basis of its production during life or immediately after death.
Furthermore, the spatter may have originated from any source of a
bloody nature through, or over which, air has been blown with
sufﬁcient force at the air–liquid interface. Thus, for instance, it
could be from stab wounds to the chest or a cut windpipe as well as
from a normal or distorted mouth or nose.
5.2. Behaviour of experimentally generated respired aerosols
Whilst the experimental studies reported in this paper are of a
very simple nature, they demonstrate collectively the qualitative
nature of respired blood aerosols and their behaviour and enable
more objective interpretation of their relevance and signiﬁcance to
the evaluation of a crime scene. The explanations for the properties
of such blood aerosols and their spatter properties are in
agreement with the known behaviour of other aerosols produced
in different situations.
The purposes of the various studies were not identical in all
respects. A number of pertinent questions were addressed. Each
study stands in its own right; it was not considered appropriate to
use identical conditions for all experiments.
The straw experiments (Study 1) demonstrated just how little
blood was needed and how small a surface could be coated with
blood to generate a signiﬁcant amount of aerosol. The small
volume
of
air
required
was
also
demonstrated.
The
more
physiological study (Study 2), involving upright spitting of
voiceless sounds demonstrated again the small volume of air
and effort required together with the link to speech. The semi-
prone study (Study 3) was inevitably different from Studies 1 and 2
because of posture and the fact that the nose was also used. The
other studies demonstrated the ability of the ﬁne blood droplets to
travel a signiﬁcant distance, Study 3 demonstrated similar
behaviour for both sources of aerosol. The use of the same target
was not considered an essential requirement for this experiment –
instead use of a human target was considered helpful for explicitly
demonstrating how a person might capture such a respired
aerosol.
Study 4 demonstrated in a simple unquestionably mechanical
environment that similar blood aerosols could be created for
comparable, if not identical, situations. Using the mechanical
model it was possible to explicitly alter key variables. There could
be no question as to the small pressures or short timescales
involved, nor about the small volume of air required. These
variables had to be estimated in all the human-based experiments.
The use of different instilled blood volumes was not considered
a major problem because it was clear that not all blood was
aerosolised in each experiment. It was considered most important
to ensure that enough blood was placed in the region likely to
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
151


--- PAGE 9 ---

generate the aerosol. It is reasonable to note that the volume of
blood instilled varied only between 1 and 2 ml. It is reasonable to
consider this to be a small amount of blood compared to what
might be expected in any real life situation.
5.2.1. Mechanism of formation
Study 4 demonstrated, in a very controlled manner, that a very
small quantity of blood wetting a surface may be aerosolised by a
small volume of air forced to ﬂow over it. The equipment used is a
realistic representation of the critical elements of the respiratory
system if one is interested in the formation of aerosols in the
vicinity of either the frontal aspects of the nose or possibly the
clenched mouth or pursed lips. The detailed nature of the geometry
and ﬂow conditions far upstream of the site of the blood are not
important other than to produce a controllable pulse of a known
volume of air.
The production of respiration derived aerosols is not dependent
on
high
overall
driving
pressures
being
generated
by
the
respiratory system. Furthermore, it is not a prerequisite for
generating such an aerosol that large breaths, or sustained ﬂows,
are involved in its production. Rather, the process of forming the
droplets is extremely rapid (of the order of 1 ms [9,13]). The levels
of shear force caused locally by the airﬂow at the liquid surface
required to break down the blood liquid surface can be generated
by short expiratory-like puffs of air.
5.2.2. Size characteristics of aerosol droplets
One of the important properties of respired blood aerosols, as
demonstrated throughout our work, is the smallness of their
droplet size The aerosol contains a spectrum of droplet size, from
very small (less than 0.1 mm dia.) to over 1 mm dia. The
experiments did not permit exact measurements of the diameters
of the aerosol droplets which, on landing, would have spread to
some extent through the matrix of the paper targets, which were
capable of wetting by blood or water. The measured spot diameter
would therefore be greater than that of the related droplet.
Consequently, the measurement approach throughout this work
has been to conservatively over-estimate that parent droplet size.
Only the most general nature of the droplet size distribution
was deduced in our studies. The spot detection and counting
method was limited by the ability of a trained observer to detect
spots with the naked eye, or a low power hand lens. As a general
result, only spots larger than approx. 0.1 mm were detected, and
some of them may have been missed; as a result the spot counts
resulting from the smallest droplets could have been somewhat
under-estimated. The larger spots, say over 1 mm diameter, were
far more easily detected and not missed in the counting process.
Throughout the present work, it would be reasonable to
interpret results as indicating that the observed pattern of spatter
spot numbers and sizes relate to aerosols of a size distribution
including droplets maybe smaller than 0.1 mm, with few larger
than 1 mm diameter. The distribution of actual droplet numbers, or
number density, would, in reality, be more biased towards the
small size than as measured. Furthermore the targets used would
not have captured all the droplets that were generated, some
would have dropped out of the airstream without reaching the
target.
The general, sub-millimetre size characteristic of the respired
blood aerosols is consistent with the size distributions reported
elsewhere [9] for water aerosols generated by shearing of air over a
liquid surface.
The distance travelled by the aerosol droplets (both large and
very small) can exceed 1 m. Whilst there might be an argument
that could explain the travel of the largest droplets over such a
distance based on ballistic theory, this is not the case for the
smaller droplets. Their travel can only be explained on the basis of
the assisted transport via the exhaled breath, or puff of air, as
explained above.
5.2.3. Volume of blood required to produce a respiratory aerosol
Studies 1 and 4 also amply demonstrated the large number of
spots that can be generated from a very small sample of blood
placed within the nasal tube. If the whole of the instilled blood
(0.045 ml) used in any run in Study 4 were fragmented into
droplets of 1 mm diameter, it would produce over 90 droplets;
were it fragmented into the smaller size of 0.1 mm, it would
produce over 90,000 droplets. The message is very clear, it requires
only a very small amount indeed of blood to be aerosolised for it to
be seen as a spatter pattern of a very considerable number of spots.
It is easy for an observer to be seduced into thinking of it as a
sizeable amount of blood from which the spots were formed. The
amount of blood from which the aerosol is formed demonstrates
that it is not necessary for a considerable surface to be copiously
covered in blood, the spray can come from a very small area of
blood-wetted surface.
5.2.4. Comparison of the aerosols produced in the various studies
All the experiments using a human subject (Studies 1–3), were
inevitably less controlled in some ways than was the case with the
physical model. However, use of a compliant subject enabled the
introduction of manoeuvres that would have been difﬁcult to
simulate in the physical model. The human studies also overcame
any possible criticism that the real human anatomy and physiology
were inconsistent with the geometric and dynamic needs for
aerosol production in the situations of interest.
In essence, Study 1 (involving pufﬁng through a straw)
replicated the physical model (Study 4) and demonstrated without
question that a human subject, when exhaling a short puff of air of
a similar volume to the smallest investigated in Study 4, could
produce an expirated blood aerosol. Air blown over a thinly blood-
coated inner surface of a short straw, that perhaps mimicked a
bloody nose or a constricted mouth, can produce an aerosol that
travels over 1 m horizontally. The speed and duration of the airﬂow
could be relatively small (speed 3.5 m s1; duration 0.5 s) and
little pressure was required, indicating that it did not require much
effort to undertake the manoeuvre.
The resulting spatter pattern on the distant target (Study 1) was
comprised of spots of a similar size distribution and number to
those obtained in Study 4, again indicating the similarity of the two
manoeuvres. Whilst some larger spots were detected on the target,
numerous small diameter spots were present too and their
presence could not be predicted on the basis of ballistics. The
size characteristics of the captured spatter reﬂected those of air
generated sprays in other situations [9,14].
The ranked results presented in Fig. 4 demonstrate that,
although there was a small difference in the average number of
captured spots between the two straw lengths, length is not a
major inﬂuence on the amount of aerosol captured. Furthermore,
expirations of all sound levels were capable of producing copious
aerosol droplets. The highest and medium sounds clearly produced
the greater, fairly similar, numbers of captured spots, the low
sound level produced fewer spots. If sound level is an indicator of
effort, this implies that even the runs of low effort were able to
produce a considerable number of droplets, but the perceived
effort, in the opinion of an onlooker, would not be a simple reliable
indicator of the likely amount of a respired aerosol generated or
captured on a person close by.
Study 2, using scenarios more representative of real life,
demonstrated that the spatter pattern is as to be expected on the
basis of the simpler, or more primitive models. Blood exhaled
through the small mouth oriﬁces used to produce the sounds was
readily aerosolised. Again, only very small, short exhalations were
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
152


--- PAGE 10 ---

required to produce a respiratory aerosol comprising many small
droplets of considerably less than 1 mm dia., that could travel a
considerable distance. In both cases there were very many more
small droplets (less than 1 mm dia.) than large ones, demonstrat-
ing the ability to produce aerosols that may be categorised as
essentially of small droplet size.
Interestingly, although the ‘P’ and ‘S’ involved similar peak
pressures, the ‘S’ produced somewhat more captured droplets. The
mouth and lip movements are not the same in the two
manoeuvres, their close juxtaposition is more sustained in the
‘S’ and it is likely that this is the reason for the greater production of
droplets.
The pressure–time proﬁles of a ‘P’ and ‘S’ were clearly
independently detectable when expressing the composite ‘piss
off’ and this suggests that the amount of aerosol produced by
vocalising such expressions in stressful circumstances may be
signiﬁcantly increased beyond that of either of the individual
fundamentals.
For a semi-prone subject (Study 3), the observed blood spots
appeared not to be of a noticeably different nature from those
observed on the paper targets in the other studies. Despite the
different posture of the subject, the relevant expiratory ﬂow
manoeuvre could be performed and the resulting blood aerosol
behaved as expected, with a similar size distribution to that found
in the other studies. The distribution of the captured spots on the
overalls of the observer was as expected allowing for partial
shielding of the torso by the outstretched arm and kneeling
posture.
5.2.5. Respiratory aerosol transport mechanism
The
expected
initial
speed
of
expulsion
of
the
aerosol
(estimated at approx. 1–4 m s1) in all three human studies was
far too low to expect any but the larger droplets (approx. 1 mm
dia.) to reach the targets, were they to depend on conventional
ballistic propulsive travel. The capture of the smaller droplets by
the targets required them to be transported by some other
mechanism. An initial speed of 5 m s1 would enable larger
droplets to travel ballistically well in excess of the distance
required to hit any of the targets used in these experiments,
however, such an initial speed would not carry the smaller
droplets, of less than 1 mm dia., this far – as demonstrated in
Fig. 10a and b.
Both rudimentary observation of commonplace actions such as
pufﬁng out an expiratory bolus of air on a cold winter’s day and
more exacting studies [15] indicate the clear plausibility of the
entrainment of the aerosolised blood in the puff of air. This
structured bolus of air is capable of travelling considerable
distances, greater than that to the targets used in the present
studies, and of transporting smaller blood droplets within it.
Interestingly,
because
the
transport
mechanism
favours
retention of the smaller droplets, it can act as a ﬁltration
mechanism
by
which
the
larger
droplets
are
able
to
be
progressively lost, or indeed not be caught up signiﬁcantly in
the formation of the aerosol. The smaller ones are retained within
a relatively slowly expanding package and not dispersed in a wide
arc as might possibly be expected if they were to behave like
impact spatter. The way in which individual droplets, once
formed, are accelerated by the viscous drag of the air ﬂowing past
them favours the smaller droplets reaching the carrier airspeed
and being transported by the bolus; the larger droplets will not be
as strongly accelerated towards this speed and thus possess even
less inertia to propel them to the target. This separation
mechanism explains the observation in Study 4 that large
droplets were found on the horizontal target placed near the
nasal tip, whereas the small droplets were transported to the
distant vertical target.
Although the process was not investigated in the present
experiments, Hunt et al. [15] point out that the forward motion of
an exhaled vortical structure is vulnerable to being deﬂected in its
forward path by extraneous sideways air movements such as
environmental air currents; such currents could signiﬁcantly
deﬂect, but, neither destroy the vortex nor prevent, its transport of
entrained aerosol droplets. The manner in which an exhaled
structured package of air breaks down suddenly by lateral
dispersion on close approach to an obstacle in its path explains
the observed spread of captured blood spots on the various targets
used and why many spots are to be found high up on a target well
above a horizontal line from the point of origin.
The fact that respiratory aerosols are prone to ﬁltering out
larger droplets as they are transported is liable to lead to a
misinterpretation of captured spatter patterns some distance from
their origin because of the apparently small mean size and
distribution. Such patterns may be classiﬁed as small droplet size
distributions and thus be confused inadvertently with impact
spatter patterns resulting from higher speed processes.
5.2.6. Contamination of blood droplets
Dilution of blood with saliva, air bubbles within droplets, or
frothing of blood, were not evident in any of the studies reported.
Neither the straw studies (Study 1) nor the physical model studies
(Study 4) involved blood being introduced at sites at risk of saliva
contamination and the aerosolisation process was not liable to
cause air entrainment within droplets. As would be expected, all
observed spots showed no signs of such effects.
The upright spitting and semi-prone studies (Studies 2 and 3)
involved blood placed in the mouth – in front and immediately
behind the teeth, or in the nostril and vestibule of the nose. In all
these studies, the subject did not cause contamination of the blood
with his saliva, nor was frothing evident. Again, no spots captured
on the targets showed signs of either saliva contamination or
evidence of encapsulated air bubbles. It might be expected that
contamination with saliva or the entrapment of air bubbles in the
droplets would be more likely if the exhaled blood were derived
from deeper into the mouth, or the lung airways as is possibly more
common in cases of respiratory derived spatter.
Dilution of blood with saliva would not signiﬁcantly alter the
physical properties of the liquid and thus the production and ﬂight
characteristics of contaminated or uncontaminated blood droplets
would not be expected to be discernibly different. Entrapment of
air within droplets would make individual droplets less dense, they
would then have a smaller effective aerodynamic diameter and be
more likely to behave as the experimentally observed smaller
droplets in the present work.
5.2.7. Comparison of small volume exhalation droplet transport with
coughs and sneezes
Whilst the objective of the current work was to investigate
small exhalations of air and blood aerosols, it is potentially
instructive to compare their behaviour with what might be
expected for large expired volume phenomena, particularly
coughing and sneezing, which are associated with a relatively
explosive expulsion of air and liquid droplets on release of a high
pressure constriction in the respiratory tract. Interestingly, despite
the relevance of coughing and sneezing to the spread of respiratory
airborne infection, still little is known about the ﬂuid mechanics of
these processes [21].
Coughing is commonly associated with respiratory infection,
chronic bronchitis and asthma. The process is able to help clear the
central airways as far peripherally as about the seventh generation
of bronchial airway and is thus a potentially potent process by
which airborne infectious material can be spread. Cough is a reﬂex
mechanism which may be triggered by irritation of the larynx,
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
153


--- PAGE 11 ---

bronchial airway irritability or local obstruction or other stimuli.
Coughing starts with a brief rapid inhalation, usually greater than
the normal breath volume followed by closure of the glottis for
200 ms or so which is accompanied by a rapid rise in upstream
pressure
to
around
75 mm Hg
through
diaphragmatic
and
expiratory muscle contraction. On opening the glottis, an explosive
expiration is produced predominantly through the open mouth.
The initial phase of a cough is a horizontal plume of air from the
semi-open mouth [21,22]. The peak velocity of airﬂow, reached
within approx. 0.1 s, depends upon the effort involved and has
been reported to range from 8 [23] to 13 m s1 [24]. The second
phase is strongly associated with a nasal exhalation aimed more
downwards. The ﬁnal phase is again predominantly oral with the
total process lasting typically less than 1 s. These phases are
associated with a rapidly diminishing driving pressure and
resultant ﬂow rate of air. Typical volumes of air exhaled in a
single cough range from over 1 l to 2 l [24], but depend on effort
and the initial inhalation volume.
Sneezing is a reﬂex action caused by irritation of the wall of the
nasal cavity. As with a cough, a sneeze follows an unusually large
inhalation and brief closure of the respiratory tract – mainly at the
level of the soft palate and uvula rather than the larynx – coupled
with a rapid build up of upstream pressure. When this is released, a
very high ﬂow rate of air passes through both the mouth and nose
helping to clear foreign matter. There appear to be no authoritative
estimates of the exhaled volumes and ﬂow rates via each oriﬁce,
but speeds of exhalation are reported to be of the order of 50–
100 m s1 [25].
Because of the large volume of air exhaled by either a cough or
sneeze, they are able potentially to expel droplets that originate
from deeper into the respiratory tract than is possible for the small
volume
manoeuvres
with
which
this
paper
is
principally
concerned. Whilst both large volume actions exhale air from the
alveolar regions of the lung, how far down into the depths of the
bronchial tree airborne droplets may be formed cannot be
predicted readily. Droplet creation will depend upon the transient
local level of the wall shear force achieved in the peripheral
generations of bronchi. It is known that the level of wall shear force
can be high in the more central bronchial airways, but that it
diminishes rapidly towards the periphery of the airway tree (on
either inhalation or exhalation) because of the architecture and
expanding cross-sectional area of the bifurcating bronchial system
[26,27]. Whilst coughing is conventionally believed to be helpful in
clearing airways of obstructions as peripherally as approximately
the seventh to tenth generations, information is not available
regarding the source of exhaled droplets. The same holds true for
sneezing.
Whilst both coughing and sneezing are capable of generating
aerosols of copious numbers of aqueous droplets by shearing the
mucosal walls of the respiratory tract, the two processes appear to
generate somewhat differing numbers. A cough is said typically to
generate around 3000 droplets [28] whilst a sneeze may be
associated with 40,000 droplets [29].
The typical size ranges of droplets are not available though it is
recognised that individual droplets, in either a cough or sneeze, are
strongly liable to surface evaporation during their lifespan and
thus can become very small – of the order of 0.005–0.012 mm dia.
It is also recognised that the exhaled aerosol is highly heteroge-
neous in size, containing many much larger droplets; such larger
droplets are known not to travel through the surrounding air with
the same characteristics as the smaller ones and tend to drop out of
the exhaled air envelope under the inﬂuence of gravity [23,30].
Small volume exhalations, such as those considered in this
paper, establish a turbulent starting vortex ring which propagates
as described above transporting the entrained aerosol droplets
away from the source. The same process is to be found when
exhaling a larger and longer lasting breath [31], but with an
attendant jet of exhaled air in its wake. The impulsive starting
vortex, leading the turbulent jet has been shown to travel
signiﬁcant distances whilst most of the burden of entrained
droplets is retained in the leading vortex and the body of the jet.
Owing to the dynamic nature of the jet formation, with potentially
changing nose and mouth oriﬁce orientation and shape changes
during the process, the emerging jet expands with distance in a
similar, but not identical, way to that classically described for
turbulent jets emerging into a quiescent environment [17]. The
smaller diameter droplets are transported very effectively within
the envelope of the vortex and jet and thus are able to achieve long
distances from the source, well beyond that predicted on the basis
of ballistic ﬂight. The mathematical description of the droplet
transport process is discussed in some detail by Hunt et al. [15].
6. Conclusions
Based on the extensive and novel experimental studies
undertaken in relation to the Sioˆn Jenkins case, it is clear that
blood can be aerosolised by air being forced through conduits
whose surfaces are bloody. This mechanism of droplet production
is different from the processes of impact and cast off. Such respired
blood could be produced by a person exhaling through a bloody
mouth or nose. Similarly, lung air venting through a bloody chest
wound, or elsewhere, could also produce a respired aerosol.
Blood aerosols can be produced by the exhalation of very small
volumes, certainly less than 60 ml, of air through a single nostril or
narrowed jaws, teeth and lips. They can also be produced by use of
a simple physical model system and by pufﬁng through straws. The
associated physical exertion and speed of exhalation, whilst not
measured accurately, were demonstrably not very high.
The respired aerosols produced in the experiments reported
contained hundreds to thousands of blood droplets of an estimated
range of diameters from less than 0.1 mm to more than 1 mm. The
total amount of blood from which these droplets derived would
itself have been very small.
The general similarity of the droplet size ranges in the various
experiments
undertaken in
different
postures
and
exhaling
through a variety of conduits was noted. The observed size range
would appear to be characteristic of aerosols generated by the
shear force of air over a bloody surface.
Both large and small droplets in the exhaled blood aerosol are
able to travel signiﬁcant distances of the order of 1 m or more.
Particularly, the typical observed distances travelled by small
droplets, transported in the exhaled breath, are considerably
greater than would be possible if they were propelled ballistically
through still air. Consequently, the captured deposition patterns of
respiratory derived aerosols may be confused with other patterns
caused by airborne blood from other origins.
Funding source
The work was funded by the Legal Services Commission.
Conﬂict of interest statement
DD acted as an expert witness to the Courts in the R v Sioˆn
Jenkins trials [2–5]. RCS acted in a similar capacity in trials [3–
5,7,8]. Fees were received from the Courts and the Legal Services
Commission.
References
[1] R v X Jenkins, Lewes Crown Court (Gage J., June–July 1998).
[2] R v X Jenkins, Unreported, 21st December 1999 (CA, Case No: 9804720 W3).
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
154


--- PAGE 12 ---

[3] R v X Jenkins, 2004, EWCA Crim. 2047.
[4] R v X Jenkins, Central Criminal Court (Rafferty J., April–July 2005).
[5] R v X Jenkins, Central Criminal Court (Clarke J., October 2005–February 2006).
[6] S. Jenkins, B. Wofﬁnden, The Murder of Billie-Jo, John Blake Publishing, London,
2008.
[7] R v X Barron, 2009, EWCA Crim. 910.
[8] R v X Barron, Leeds Crown Court (Holroyde J., November–December 2009).
[9] P. Marmottant, E. Villermaux, On spray formation, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 498
(2004) 73–111.
[10] C.G. Caro, T.J. Pedley, R.C. Schroter, W.A. Seed, The Mechanics of the Circulation,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1978.
[11] P.L. Altman, D.S. Ditmer (Eds.), Respiration and Circulation, Federation of Ameri-
can Societies for Experimental Biology, Bethesda, MD, USA, 1971.
[12] Y.L. Sinai, A model of interfacial stress and spray generation by gas ﬂowing over a
deep wavy pool, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 179 (1987) 327–344.
[13] B.E. Gelfand, Droplet breakup phenomena in ﬂows with velocity lag, Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science 22 (1996) 201–265.
[14] E. Villermaux, P. Marmottant, J. Duplat, Ligament-mediated spray formation,
Physical Review Letters 92 (2004) 074501 (4).
[15] J.C.R. Hunt, R. Delfos, I. Eames, R.J. Perkins, Vortices, complex ﬂows and inertial
particles, Journal of Flow, Turbulence and Combustion 79 (2006) 207–234.
[16] I. Eames, J.W. Tang, J.C.R. Hunt, Y. Li, Murder, death and disease, in: Mathematics
Today, The Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, London, April 2009, pp.
61–64.
[17] R.B. Bird, W.E. Stewart, E.N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena,
John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., London, 1960.
[18] R.H. Mole, Fibrinolysin and the ﬂuidity of the blood post mortem, Journal of
Pathology and Bacteriology 60 (1948) 413–427.
[19] S. Takeichi, C. Wakasugi, I. Shikata, Fluidity of cadaveric blood after sudden death.
Part I. Post mortem ﬁbrinolysis and plasma catecholamine level, American Journal
of Forensic Medicine and Pathology 5 (1984) 223–228.
[20] S. Takeichi, C. Wakasugi, I. Shikata, Fluidity of cadaveric blood after sudden death.
Part II. Mechanism of release of plasminogen activator from blood vessels,
American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology 6 (1985) 25–29.
[21] J.W. Tang, T.L. Liebner, B.A. Craven, G.S. Settles, A Schlieren optical study of the
human cough with and without wearing masks for aerosol infection control,
Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6 (2009) S727–S736.
[22] J.W. Tang, G.S. Settles, Coughing and aerosols, New England Journal of Medicine
359 (2008) e19.
[23] J.W. Tang, Y. Li, I. Eames, P.K.S. Chan, G.L. Ridgway, Factors involved in the aerosol
transmission of infection and control of ventilation in healthcare premises,
Journal of Hospital Infection 64 (2006) 100–114.
[24] T.A. Khan, H. Higuchi, D.R. Marr, M.N. Glauser, Unsteady ﬂow measurements of
human micro environment using time-resolved particle image velocimetry, in:
Proceedings: Room Ventilation, Coimbra, Portugal, 2004.
[25] W.F. Wells, Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene,
Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, 1955.
[26] R.C. Schroter, M.F. Sudlow, Flow patterns in models of the human bronchial
airways, Respiration Physiology 7 (1969) 341–355.
[27] C.G. Phillips, S.R. Kaye, R.C. Schroter, A diameter-based reconstruction of the
branching pattern of the human bronchial tree. Part I. Description and applica-
tion, Respiration Physiology 98 (1994) 193–217.
[28] R.M. Des Prez, C.R. Heim, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in: G.L. Mandell, R.G.
Douglas, Jr., J.E. Bennett (Eds.), Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases, 3rd
ed., Churchill Livingston, New York, 1990, pp. 1877–1906.
[29] C.S. Cox, The Aerobiological Pathway of Microorganisms,
John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, 1987.
[30] E.C. Cole, C.E. Cook, Characterization of infectious aerosols in health care facilities:
an aid to effective engineering controls and preventive strategies, American
Journal of Infection Control 26 (1998) 453–464.
[31] G.S. Settles, Fluid mechanics and homeland security, Annual Review of Fluid
Mechanics 38 (2006) 87–110.
D. Denison et al. / Forensic Science International 204 (2011) 144–155
155
