

--- PAGE 1 ---

Case report
Unusual blood spatter patterns on the ﬁrearm and hand: A backspatter analysis to
reconstruct the position and orientation of a ﬁrearm
S.N. Kunz *, H. Brandtner, H. Meyer
IFFB Gerichtsmedizin und Forensische Neuropsychiatrie, Paris-Lodron Universita¨t Salzburg, O¨sterreich, Austria
In cases of unclear circumstances, the deposition of bloodstains,
especially backspatter on a ﬁrearm or a shooter, can considerably
assist in the reconstruction of shooting incidents. In shots to the
head, biological material (such as blood and brain tissue) is ejected
back towards the weapon. This phenomenon can lead to the
deposition of bloodstains on the trigger, trigger guard, weapon and
supporting hand and thus can be used to determine whether and in
which position a person has ﬁred a weapon. [1–4] However, in
certain cases a peculiar distribution of bloodstains on the hand of a
victim can cause confusion. In this case, atypical bloodstain pattern
could be seen on the hands of a probable suicide victim. Due to the
excessive bloodstains on the right side of the body, the position of
the gun on the left side of the body and no motive, an autopsy was
performed.
1. Case background
A 90-year-old man was discovered dead in his house. He was
found sitting in an upright position, leaning back against a folded
deck chair (Fig. 1). The right side of his body was profusely covered
in blood. A blood pool could also be seen on the ground next to him,
oriented towards his right elbow. In the right temporal region,
there was a circular wound, which was covered with blood. On the
left side of the body, a pistol was detected (Fig. 2). The left arm
rested on his left thigh. According to family members, the deceased
did not mention any suicidal intentions, and there was no history
of mental or physical illness. A suicide note was not found.
2. Weapon
The weapon used was a ‘Walter PPK 7.65’, a blowback-operated
semi-automatic pistol with a traditional double-action trigger
mechanism and a single-column magazine, calibre 7.65 mm (Fig.
3). The pistol was in the lawful possession of the deceased.
Uncharacteristic bloodstains were found on the ﬁrearm. The
distribution of blood showed no preferential site. Inconsistent
droplets were widely spread over the weapon. An angle of
incidence could not be calculated. Projected patterns were mainly
found on the right outer side of the slide. Individual stains were
even detected on the rear side of the grip. No bloodstains could be
seen in the lower region of the grip.
3. Autopsy report
The autopsy ﬁndings suggested a contact gunshot wound to the
right temple. The bullet trajectory was from right to left in the
horizontal plane. The wound channel within the brain led from the
right frontal area below the temporal lobe slightly oblique into the
Forensic Science International 228 (2013) e54–e57
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 24 October 2012
Accepted 4 February 2013
Available online 7 March 2013
Keywords:
Forensic science
Blood stain pattern analysis
Backspatter
Firearm fatality
Suicide
Reconstruction
A B S T R A C T
When it comes to ﬁrearm fatalities, the main goal of forensic analysis is to distinguish ﬁrearm suicides
from homicides and accidents. Apart from the location of the entrance wound, wound path trajectory
and gunshot residue, blood stain pattern analysis of gunshot-related backspatter on the hands of the
victim can be an essential tool not only to determine which hand was holding the ﬁrearm, but also to
reconstruct the position from which a weapon was ﬁred. We present a case of a 90-year-old man, who
was found dead in his house. Because of unclear circumstances and an unusual position of the deceased
with a gunshot entrance wound to the right temporal region and a ﬁrearm found on the left side of his
body, an autopsy was performed. Due to the unusual bloodspatter stains on the hands and the ﬁrearm, it
was possible to deduce the position and orientation of the hands and the ﬁrearm of the deceased. We
could reconstruct that the man held the weapon in his right hand, using the left hand to stabilise the
ﬁrearm and the right thumb to pull the trigger. A contact shot to the right temple led to central regulatory
failure due to extensive brain injury. The manner of death was concluded to be a suicide.
 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author at: IFFB Gerichtsmedizin und Forensische Neuropsychia-
trie, Paris-Lodron Universita¨t Salzburg-Linz, Ignaz-Harrer-Str. 79, 5020 Salzburg,
Austria. Tel.: +43 662 8044 3800.
E-mail address: sebastian.kunz@sbg.ac.at (S.N. Kunz).
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/fo r sc iin t
0379-0738/$ – see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2013.02.012


--- PAGE 2 ---

cerebrum and through the middle part of the left temporal lobe,
crossing the midline just before the optic chiasm.
The examination of the entrance wound on the right temporal
region with a stereomicroscope revealed a muzzle imprint, an
abrasion rim and short radial skin tears in the front margin of the
defect (Fig. 4). Additionally, a small soot cavity could be sounded
towards the upper right part of the defect.
On the left temple, an irregular galea defect with matching
wound rims could be detected. No soot cavity or abrasion ring was
present and the skull bone showed a circular defect, which
widened in a cone-shaped conﬁguration towards the exterior.
The lungs showed signs of blood aspiration in the upper airways
and within the lungs.
All other organs showed no signs of trauma or relevant
pathophysiological changes. Injuries were noted neither in the
mediastinum, thoracic cavities, nor in the upper and lower
extremities.
The cause of death was central regulatory failure due to
extensive brain injury. The manner of death was ruled as suicide.
Contributory factors were not detected.
4. Backspatter
The droplets were predominantly distributed on the extensor
side of the ﬁngers and the radial aspect of the hands. Several
elongated droplets in the shape of ‘exclamation marks’ found on
the middle joint of the right index ﬁnger pointed approximately
towards the ﬁngertip. Similar, parallel patterns were detected on
the base joint, mostly with the same direction. Individual droplets
at the inner part of the index ﬁnger were aligned towards the palm
of the hand (Figs. 5 and 6). Additionally, round blood spatters were
situated on the ulnar side of the index ﬁnger as well as on the back
of the hand.
The left hand showed round microspatter at the extensor side of
the thumb and index ﬁnger (Fig. 7). The palm of the hands showed
no bloodstains.
5. Discussion
In order to be able to reconstruct the events at a crime scene,
forensic investigators study the shapes, sizes and distribution of
bloodstains. Together with autopsy ﬁndings about injuries, a
medically and scientiﬁcally based reconstruction of possible
wounding mechanisms is possible [5].
Based primarily on the characteristics and location of the
entrance wound and direction of bullet path, the presented case
would be classiﬁed as a suicide. [6] However, the ﬁnal position of
the weapon on the left side of the body in relation to the entrance
wound on the right side of the head and intensive bloodstains on
the weapon and body was the cause of speculation about the
correctness of this primary assumption.
In most cases, blood spatter on the hands of a victim or a
defendant are usually neglected in favour of those found at the
crime scene. Nevertheless, several publications show that the
analysis of backspatter is an important tool for mathematical and
physical modelling of blood spatter and thus enables the
reconstruction of the gun’s position and the manner in which it
has been used [7–9].
In the case at hand, parallel bloodstains on the back of the right
hand, thumb and index ﬁnger together with the discreetly visible
stains on the extensor side of left thumb and index ﬁnger suggest
that the back of the right hand was directed away from the area of
origin. Backspatter on the dorsal part of the thumb and index ﬁnger
indicates that the blood was projected away from the wrist in an
oblique angle towards the inner part of the ﬁngers and palm of the
hand and towards the ﬁngertips. Taking into account the fact that
the palm of the right hand was free from spatter, the weapon must
have been held backwards in the right hand with the right thumb
embracing the trigger (Fig. 8a and b). This reconstruction is
supported by the extensive bloodstains on the index ﬁnger, as it is
the most prominent part at this precise position, facing away from
Fig. 1. End position of the deceased.
Fig. 2. End position of the weapon.
Fig. 3. Pistol, which was found next to the body.
S.N. Kunz et al. / Forensic Science International 228 (2013) e54–e57 
e55


--- PAGE 3 ---

the entrance wound. Minor spatter on the left hand suggests that
this hand was used to stabilise the shooting hand (Fig. 8a and b).
Considering the tissue damage within the brain and the minor
blood 
aspiration, 
it 
can be 
assumed 
that minor 
muscular
movement was still possible within a short time period after
the shot. The capacity of action or even undisturbed consciousness
after suicidal temporal gunshot wounds is a known phenomenon
[10] and can explain the ﬁnal position of the weapon on the left
side of the body.
The present ﬁndings are consistent with recent literature [11]
and give another good example of the signiﬁcance of backspatter
analysis. Particularly in doubtful cases involving ﬁrearms, a
sufﬁcient analysis of possible backspatter on the hands is an
essential forensic tool to determine the position from which a
weapon has been ﬁred.
6. Limitation
Even though the bloodstains on the hands showed no trapped
bubbles or roundish recesses, it cannot be excluded that individual
droplets might be the result of expirated blood. However, the
autopsy results and our calculations have shown that this
possibility would not alter the weapon’s position.
Fig. 4. Entrance wound.
Fig. 5. Right hand.
Fig. 6. Right hand.
Fig. 7. Left hand.
Fig. 8. (a) Reconstructed position of the shooting hand. (b) Reconstructed position of
ﬁrearm.
S.N. Kunz et al. / Forensic Science International 228 (2013) e54–e57
e56


--- PAGE 4 ---

7. Conclusion
This case was remarkable for an unusual distribution of
backspatter, which could be explained by an abnormal position
of the trigger and supporting hand during ﬁre.
Especially in doubtful cases, a careful bloodstain pattern
analysis of backspatter ﬁndings on the hands can help to
reconstruct the position of the weapon and distinguish between
a homicide, suicide and accident.
Conﬂicts of interest
This article is a result of forensic reconstruction work, which
was done for the police. The research was not funded and there is
no actual or potential conﬂict of interest in relation to this article.
References
[1] K. Yen, M.J. Thali, B.P. Kneubuehl, O. Peschel, U. Zollinger, R. Dirnhofer, Blood-
spatter patterns: hands hold clues for the forensic reconstruction of the sequence
of events, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 24 (2003) 132–140.
[2] B. Karger, R. Nu¨sse, T. Bajanowski, Backspatter on the ﬁrearm and hand in
experimental close-range gunshot to the head, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 23
(2002) 211–213.
[3] B. Karger, R. Nu¨sse, H.D. Tro¨ger, B. Brinkmann, Backspatter from experimental
close-range shots to the head. II. Microbackspatter and the morphology of blood-
stains, Int. J. Legal Med. 110 (1997) 27–30.
[4] B. Karger, R. Nu¨sse, G. Schroeder, S. Wu¨stenbecker, B. Brinkmann, Backspatter
from experimental close-range shots to the head. I. Macrobackspatter, Int. J. Legal
Med. 109 (1996) 66–74.
[5] O. Peschel, S.N. Kunz, M.A. Rothschild, E. Mu¨ tzel:, Blood stain pattern analysis,
Forensic. Sci. Med. Pathol. 7 (2011) 257–270.
[6] H. Druid, Site of entrance wound and direction of bullet path in ﬁrearm fatalities
as indicators of homicide versus suicide, Forensic Sci. Int. 88 (1997) 147–162.
[7] B.G. Stephens, T.B. Allen, Back spatter of blood from gunshot wounds-observa-
tions and experimental simulation, J. Forensic Sci. 28 (1983) 437–439.
[8] B. Karger, S. Rand, T. Fracasso, H. Pfeiffer, Bloodstain pattern analysis – casework
experience, Forensic Sci. Int. 181 (2008) 15–20.
[9] P.L. Davidson, M.C. Taylor, S.J. Wilson, K.A. Walsh, J.A. Kieser, Physical Components of
Soft-Tissue Ballistic Wounding and Their Involvement in the Generation of Blood
Backspatter, J Forensic Sci. (2012), doi:10.1111/j.1556-4029.2012.02143.x. [Epub
ahead of print].
[10] U. Klages, D. Weithoener, H. Fro¨ssler, H. Terwort, Survival time, capacity of action
and radiological diagnosis after gunshot wounds of the cranium, Rechtsmedizin
76 (1975) 309–319.
[11] M.A. Verhoff, B. Karger, Atypical gunshot entrance wound and extensive back-
spatter, Int. J. Legal Med. 117 (2003) 229–231.
S.N. Kunz et al. / Forensic Science International 228 (2013) e54–e57 
e57
