

--- PAGE 1 ---

Experimental validation of a numerical model for predicting the
trajectory of blood drops in typical crime scene conditions, including
droplet deformation and breakup, with a study of the effect of indoor
air currents and wind on typical spatter drop trajectories
N. Kabaliuk a, M.C. Jermy a,*, E. Williams b,c, T.L. Laber d, M.C. Taylor b
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800, Christchurch 8041, New Zealand
b Christchurch Science Centre, Institute of Environmental Sciences and Research, 27 Creyke Road, Christchurch 8041, New Zealand
c Department of Sport and Exercise Science, Faculty of Science, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
d Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, 1430 Maryland Ave. East, St. Paul, MN 55106, United States
Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 17 April 2014
Received in revised form 14 September 2014
Accepted 1 October 2014
Available online 18 October 2014
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Numerical modeling
Droplet breakup
Droplet oscillation
Drag
Trajectory
A B S T R A C T
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (BPA) provides information about events during an assault, e.g. location of
participants, weapon type and number of blows. To extract the maximum information from spatter
stains, the size, velocity and direction of the drop that produces each stain, and forces acting during ﬂight,
must be known.
A numerical scheme for accurate modeling of blood drop ﬂight, in typical crime scene conditions,
including droplet oscillation, deformation and in-ﬂight disintegration, was developed and validated
against analytical and experimental data including passive blood drop oscillations, deformation at
terminal velocity, cast-off and impact drop deformation and breakup features. 4th order Runge–Kutta
timestepping was used with the Taylor Analogy Breakup (TAB) model and Pilch and Erdman’s (1987)
expression for breakup time. Experimental data for terminal velocities, oscillations, and deformation
was obtained via digital high-speed imaging. A single model was found to describe drop behavior
accurately in passive, cast off and impact scenarios.
Terminal velocities of typical passive drops falling up to 8 m, distances and times required to reach
them were predicted within 5%. Initial oscillations of passive blood drops with diameters of
1 mm < d < 6 mm falling up to 1.5 m were studied. Predictions of oscillating passive drop aspect ratio
were within 1.6% of experiment. Under typical crime scene conditions, the velocity of the drop within the
ﬁrst 1.5 m of fall is affected little by drag, oscillation or deformation.
Blood drops with diameter 0.4–4 mm and velocity 1–15 m/s cast-off from a rotating disk showed low
deformation levels (Weber number < 3). Drops formed by blunt impact 0.1–2 mm in diameter at
velocities of 14–25 m/s were highly deformed (aspect ratios down to 0.4) and the larger impact blood
drops (1–1.5 mm in diameter) broke up at critical Weber numbers of 12–14. Most break-ups occurred
within 10–20 cm of the impact point. The model predicted deformation levels of cast-off and impact
blood drops within 5% of experiment. Under typical crime scene conditions, few cast-off drops will break
up in ﬂight. However some impact-generated drops were seen to break up, some by the vibration, others
by bag breakup.
The validated model can be used to gain deep understanding of the processes leading to spatter stains,
and can be used to answer questions about proposed scenarios, e.g. how far blood drops may travel, or
how stain patterns are affected by winds and draughts.
 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +64 3 364 2987; fax: +64 3 364 2078.
E-mail address: mark.jermy@canterbury.ac.nz (M.C. Jermy).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/fo r sc iin t
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2014.10.020
0379-0738/ 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 2 ---

1. Introduction
Violent crimes involving bloodshed may result in the formation
of a number of blood drops that move through air and eventually
impact onto a surface producing a group of bloodstains (or
bloodstain pattern). This is termed blood spatter [2].
It has been shown that stain shape can be correlated with the
drop impact angle on a target surface (the Sine law: [3–5]). The
‘sine law’ is routinely used in the analysis of crime scene bloodstain
patterns. A number of attempts have been made to correlate stain
characteristics (size and morphology) to the volume and impact
velocity of the blood drop. These studies have all focused on stains
formed as a result of blood dripping from a wound or bloodied
object (weapon) under the action of gravity ([6–9]; [63]). These
approaches have important limitations: the reproducibility in
counting of spines and the limited number (or absence) of spines
for low velocity impacts on some surfaces. Interpretation of the
stain morphology is sometimes difﬁcult, for example due to impact
surface irregularities or porosity. Further research is needed for
other types of bloodstains and target surfaces.
A common analysis done at a crime scene is the estimation of
the position of the blood source in an impact spatter event. If two
or more drop trajectories can be determined, the point at which
they intersect is the probable location of the victim at the time the
wound was inﬂicted. To determine the trajectory of an individual
drop from analyzing stain characteristics certain assumptions need
to be made.
The stringing method [10] assumes the drop trajectory is a
straight line. Gravitational and drag forces are assumed to have a
negligible effect on the direction of ﬂight while the droplet is
airborne. 
The 
Backtrak1
(http://people.physics.carleton.ca/
carter/) and Hemospat1 (http://hemospat.com/research.php)
software programs are based on the straight line trajectory
approximation. Straight line blood drop trajectory approximation
also underlies the tangent method [11]. These approaches,
however, were shown to produce considerable errors in area of
origin determination, unless the trajectories are very short and the
velocities relatively high [12–14].
Another method of blood source determination proposed by
Podworny and Carter [15] assumes parabolic trajectories of
spherical drops. Buck et al. [16] and Buck and Kneubuehl [17]
argued that this method is adequate for reconstructive purposes.
To assess the accuracy of trajectory reconstruction methods, it
is necessary to have an in-depth understanding of the physics of
blood droplet ﬂight and impact. This paper deals with predictions
of the ﬂight of droplets, for which the initial conditions are known.
In order to accurately predict the trajectory (ﬂight path) of a
blood drop to calculate its origin, the initial state of the drop (size,
shape and velocity) must be known and the forces acting during
ﬂight should be considered.
Depending on the mechanism of formation, a ﬂuid drop may be
non-spherical 
and 
experience 
shape 
oscillations 
under 
the
inﬂuence of surface tension. Drop oscillations are damped
exponentially in time by the drop ﬂuid viscosity [18,19].
As the drop travels through air it experiences inertial,
gravitational and aerodynamic drag forces. The latter is propor-
tional to drop projected area (the area facing the incident ﬂow), the
drag coefﬁcient and the dynamic pressure exerted by the external
ﬂuid (air) ﬂow.
Surface tension forces at the free surface act to minimize the
drop’s surface energy and shape it into the smallest possible
surface area, a sphere. When subject to external ﬂuid ﬂow
however, a drop deforms to balance normal and shear stresses on
its surface [20]. The level of drop deformation depends on the
intensity of the deforming aerodynamic force.
Alteration of drop shape changes its drag properties. Distortion
toward an oblate shape increases the projected area and drag
coefﬁcient (relative to the case of a spherical drop of the same
volume). This may lead to a signiﬁcant alteration in drop trajectory
[21], which is of importance to the point of origin determination.
Under certain critical conditions a drop may reach a severe state
of deformation, a so-called ‘liquid disc’. The drop may further
deform into a hollow sphere or bag, a hollow sphere with a jet or
exhibit more irregular deformation and ﬁnally disintegrates (or
breaks up) into smaller ‘child’ drops [22,23].
This raises two questions: (i) Under typical crime scene
conditions, do the deformation and oscillation of blood drops
appreciably affect their trajectory? (ii) Is mid-air breakup into
smaller drops possible in typical crime scene conditions?
This paper aims to address these issues by developing and
validating a numerical code for accurate and detailed blood drop
ﬂight modeling. Special attention is given to blood drops produced
as a result of passive dripping, cast-off and impact. The numerical
simulation described here provides a reliable and non-laborious
method for understanding and predicting the ﬂight characteristics
of spatter drops.
2. Mechanisms of spatter drop generation
The external force which causes the victim’s blood to break up
into airborne drops may be gravity (drip or passive stains), blunt
force impact (impact patterns), centripetal acceleration (cast-off)
or bullet impact (gunshot spatter patterns).
The characteristics of typical blood drop formation and ﬂight in
the ﬂuid dynamics framework are described below. Further
discussion of the physics of drop formation is given in Jermy
and Taylor [24] and Attinger et al. [25]. Further to the material in
those sources, an estimate of the range of drop sizes, velocities and
key non-dimensional parameters is given below.
Table 1
Blood drop characteristics in BPA, where rair = 1.2 kg/m3, vair ¼ 1:51  105 m2=s are air density and kinematic viscosity at 20 8C; r = 1056 kg/m3, m = 4 mN s/m2, s = 56 mN/m
are blood density, high-shear-rate viscosity and surface tension, respectively, at 37 8C.
Mechanism 
d, mm 
V, m/s 
Re 
We 
Weavg
Bo 
Oh
Passive dripping [6,55] 
3–7 
<7 
<3200 
<7 
1 
<9 
0.01
Cast-off [8,11,56] 
0.5–4 
1.5–20 
50–5300 
0.02–34 
6 
0.05–3 
0.01–0.02
Impact [8,56,57] 
0.2–2 
1.5–30 
20–4000 
0.01–39 
6 
0.01–0.7 
0.01–0.04
Gunshot [4,6] 
0.05–1a
15–45b
50–2000 
0.24–43 
10 
<0.2 
0.02–0.07
a Because of the lack of experimental data on gunshot related spatter, the size and velocity of the gunshot-induced drops have been estimated. Drop volume (and hence
diameter) was based on the reported gunshot spatter stain sizes (areas) and estimated stain thickness (calculated as a constant, 102–103, times erythrocyte dimensions).
b In some instances gunshot spatter may be affected by ﬁrearm muzzle gases [58]. In this case the relative velocity between the gases in fast movement and the drop should
be used for Weber number calculation. This would depend on the proximity to the ﬁrearm to the blood source and ﬁrearm used. The reported data on the range of magnitudes
of relative velocities associated with gunshot is lacking in BPA literature however. To avoid speculation the data from [6] was used instead to provide a reference drop velocity
range for gunshot spatter of around 30.5 m/s. The relative velocity may considerably exceed this value.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
108


--- PAGE 3 ---

Passive, 
cast-off, impact and gunshot-induced drops are
characterized in Table 1 according to dimensionless numbers
relevant to drop formation and ﬂight:
- Reynolds number (Re ¼ Vdo=vair, which is the ratio of inertial to
viscous forces acting on a drop),
- Weber number (We = rairV2do/s, the ratio of inertial and
interfacial tension forces),
- Bond number (Bo ¼ rgd2
o=s, the ratio of drop weight to
interfacial tension forces) and
- Ohnesorge number (Oh ¼ m=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rdos
p
, the ratio of viscous to
interfacial tension forces).
Where d0 and V are blood drop diameter and velocity; rair and
mair are air density and kinematic viscosity; r, m and s are blood
density, viscosity and surface tension, respectively.
The Weber number is as an indicator of the degree of drop
deformation [23]. The drop can be considered effectively spherical
for We < 1, whereas more pronounced deformation is associated
with We > 1–3 and at We higher than 13 the drop breaks up [26].
The average Weber number, Weavg, is based on the average blood
drop diameter and velocity.
Fig. 1 shows blood drop sizes and velocities plotted together
with the experimental data on terminal velocities of water drops
from [27], which were expected to be a good approximation for
blood drops at terminal velocity conditions.
Passive drops, the largest of the types considered, rarely reach
terminal velocity under crime scene conditions1 (such as a living
room, for example) (see Fig. 1) and, consequently, experience
lower levels of aerodynamic deforming force and thus deform to a
lesser extent during ﬂight. These, in addition, are prone to high-
amplitude initial oscillations [18].
Cast-off and impact drops may begin their ﬂight with velocities
much greater than their terminal velocities and possess high levels
of deformation (as indicated by We > 3). In this light, in order to
correctly predict deformation effects on drop trajectory it is not
sufﬁcient to assume the drag coefﬁcient is the same as that of a
drop at terminal velocity. An accurate approach should infer the
level of drop distortion based on the degree of the distorting
aerodynamic force expressed in terms of, for example, Weber
number. This will change as the droplet moves. The potentially
high Weber numbers of cast-off and impact drops (We > 13)
suggest the possibility of drop breakup during ﬂight.
The high levels of cast-off and impact drop deformation in ﬂight
may affect drop trajectory, and thus blood origin estimation.
Gunshot drops, the smallest of those considered, show potential
for signiﬁcant deformation during ﬂight based on high Weavg.
Breakup is predicted for bigger drops (d > 0.1–0.5 mm) where
they 
possess 
higher 
velocities 
(>30 m/s). 
Smaller 
gunshot
drops (d < 0.1 mm) are expected to experience negligible defor-
mation (We < 3) despite their relatively large velocities and may
be approximated as rigid spheres when predicting their trajecto-
ries.
Initial drop oscillation and deformation during ﬂight may have
signiﬁcant effects on the overall drag force. These factors need to be
considered in order to accurately predict blood drop origin and
drop trajectories prior to impact on a surface.
This paper describes the development of a numerical scheme to
accurately predict blood drop behavior during ﬂight. The proposed
scheme incorporates the effects of inertial, gravitational and
aerodynamic drag forces on drop ﬂight. The variation in drag
force as a result of shape oscillation and deformation due to
aerodynamic forces are also features of this scheme. The most
likely mechanisms of drop breakup during ﬂight are also
included.
The proposed scheme can predict drop ﬂight characteristics and
paths in both ‘forward’ (from the drop origin till its impact on a
surface) and ‘backward’ (from the drop position on the target
surface to its origin) modes, and in both 2D and 3D cases. Among
the output parameters are drop 3D coordinates and velocity along
the ﬂight trajectory, impact angle and velocity, range and height of
drop ﬂight.
This paper deals with the description and validation of the
numerical model for ‘‘forward’’ blood drop trajectory prediction,
where the initial size and velocity are known. The feasibility of
the ‘‘backward’’ trajectory prediction, where the trajectory is
tracked back from a dry stain, will be addressed in future
publications.
3. Numerical scheme description
To compute the trajectory of a drop, time was divided into steps.
The forces on the drop (including gravity, air resistance and
buoyancy) were estimated at each time-step. The change in
velocity and distance traveled were calculated for each time-
step and droplet position and speed updated before the next
time-step.
3.1. Equation of drop motion and numerical solution
Blood drops were modeled using a Lagrangian approach, by
applying Newton’s Second Law to an individual drop traveling
through air with density rair:
ma
! ¼ F
!
g þ F
!
b þ F
!
d
(1)
Here m ¼ ðp=6Þd3
0r is the mass of a blood drop with density r
and 
equilibrium 
(undistorted) 
diameter 
d0:F
!
g ¼ mg
!; F
!
b ¼
ðp=6Þd3
0rair g
! and F
!
d ¼ ð1=2ÞCdArairV
!
rel V
!
rel

 are gravitational,
buoyancy and air resistance forces respectively. The buoyancy
force is negligible, for a blood drop in air, but is nevertheless
included. A is the drop’s projected area that faces the ﬂow, and
Cd = f(Re) is its drag coefﬁcient as a function of Reynolds number
ðRe ¼ Vreld0=vairÞ:V
!
rel ¼ v
!  u
! is the drop velocity (relative to the
air), where u
! is the incident (free) stream velocity, whereas, v
! ¼
ðvx; vy; vzÞ is the drop intrinsic velocity with angles to x-, y- and z-
axes a, b and g respectively (see Fig. 2).
0
10
20
30
40
50
6
4
2
0
Drop velocity, m/s
Drop diameter,
 
 mm
passive
 
 dripping
cast-off
impac
 
t
gunshot
Gunn and
 
 Kinzer,
 
 1949
Fig. 1. Blood drop velocities versus sizes relative to the terminal velocity data for
water drops (Gunn and Kinzer, 1949).
1 It should be noted that from terminal velocity experiments drops as large as
10 mm in diameter survive their terminal velocity conditions without disintegra-
tion ([27]). In addition, for water drops, van Boxel [59] showed that only small drops
(d < 1 mm) would reach 95% of their terminal velocities when falling less than 2 m
from rest (at the point of formation). Larger drops need larger distances to reach
terminal conditions. For example, for a 2 mm drop to attain 95% of its terminal
velocity of 6.49 m/s it needs to fall 5.8 m.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
109


--- PAGE 4 ---

For the components of drop acceleration Eq. (1) gives the
following2,3:
ax;z ¼ dvx;z
dt
¼  1
2m CdArairV
!
relx;z V
!
rel


(2)
and
ay ¼ dvy
dt ¼  gðr  rairÞ
r
 1
2m CdArairV
!
rely V
!
rel


(3)
The sign of the drop relative velocity V
!
rel was inverted in the
equations for drop acceleration for the reverse (‘‘backward’’)
projection using the symmetry of Newton’s second law with
respect to inversion of time (a substitution of time direction from t
to t).
The set of ﬁrst-order ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for
drop 
velocity 
components 
(Eqs. 
(2) 
and 
(3)) 
were 
solved
numerically at each time step using the fourth-order Runge–Kutta
algorithm implemented in the C++ programming language. The
same routine was employed to ﬁnd the solution of the equations
for the drop Cartesian coordinates. The computing time required
for each simulation was typically 10 s with the time step
Dt = 103–105 s. The time step was determined based on a
solution convergence criterion of six orders of magnitude (106).
For drop oscillations modeling each period of oscillations (T) was
represented by at least 100 time steps (Dt = T/100).
4. Drop deformation models
The blood drop was considered to deform into an oblate or
prolate spheroid (ellipsoid of revolution about its minor or major
axes) [20] when subjected to a deforming aerodynamic force
(Fig. 3).
The level of drop deformation during ﬂight is believed to be
inﬂuenced by both the intensity and the rate of change of the
applied aerodynamic forces. A drop responds differently in the case
of slow, gradual loading (as in free fall), compared to sudden or
impulsive loading (e.g. shock wave disturbance).
In practice, the aerodynamic loading of the drop varies as its
relative velocity changes during accelerated motion. In light of this
three alternative models for the modeling of drop distortion during
ﬂight were incorporated in the present scheme.
Two of these included correlations for the aspect ratio of a
deformed drop (AR), as a measure of its distortion, at steady
terminal conditions, when drag force on a drop is balanced by its
weight 
with 
either 
AR ¼ ½4=17ðð17Bo=4Þ þ 1Þ1=2 þ ð13=17Þ
3=2
[28], where Bo ¼ rgd2
0=4s; or AR ¼ ð1 þ 0:07We1=2Þ
3 [23] with
We ¼ rairV2
reldo=s.
The models were assumed to be suitable for relatively large
drops that are moving with velocities lower than their terminal
velocities (e.g. passive drops) as an extreme case of maximum
possible deformation.
The third model for drop deformation was based on the Taylor
Analogy Breakup (TAB) model for low-Weber number sprays [29].
The model is based on an analogy between an oscillating and
π
y
z
x
v 0y
 
v 0x 
v 0z 
γ0 
β 0 
α 0
H 
L
Z 
,
z
y 
x
d0 
Fig. 2. Drop trajectory segment (left) and force balance segment diagram (right): initial drop velocity vo with initial inclination angles ao, bo and go; L, H and Z are the lengths of
drop trajectory along coordinate axes.
Fig. 3. Diagram of a deformed drop with the diameters of major (perpendicular to
the direction of drop motion) and minor (parallel) axes of the deformed drop dmax
and dmin and its shape at equilibrium (the volumes of an undisturbed and deformed
drop 
are 
Vo ¼ ðp=6Þd3
0
and 
V ¼ ðp=6Þd2
maxdmin
respectively. 
From 
volume
conservation 
considerations 
(assuming 
no 
signiﬁcant 
evaporation 
occurs):
d3
0 ¼ d2
maxdmin. 
The 
aspect 
ratio 
and 
cross-sectional 
(projected) 
area 
of 
a
deformed drop are AR ¼ dmin=dmax ¼ d3
0=d3
max and A ¼ p
4 d2
max ¼ p
4 d3
0=d3
max).
2 The model considered translational motion of axisymmetric drops, thus the lift
force was neglected. The majority of blood drops imaged in the course of this study
ﬁtted these criteria. Lift force is important for the case of irregularly deformed drops
and rotational motion.
3 In general, for a particle during its accelerating (transient) motion, the
additional virtual mass force and Bassett history force should also be considered
[60]. However, due to the relatively high density ratio of blood (or water) to that of
air (831 < r/rair < 880) the virtual mass term may be neglected. The Basset history
term is not generally negligible, however, due to its complexity, difﬁculty in
implementation and more pronounced effects for the movement at high
acceleration, it was not considered. Evaluation of the magnitude of Basset force
in different multiphase ﬂow applications can be found in Liang and Michaelides
[61]. These authors found that the Basset force may be neglected in the particle
equation of motion only when the ﬂuid to particle density ratio is very high (gas
bubbles in liquids) and the particle diameter is greater than 1 mm. For movement
with high acceleration however, the Basset term can exceed the Stokes’ term by as
much as a factor of two. These conditions are not thought to be met for typical BPA
drops.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
110


--- PAGE 5 ---

distorting drop and a spring mass system. The droplet distortion is
represented as a one-dimensional harmonic oscillation under the
deforming aerodynamic force, restoring surface tension force and
damping viscous force.4 The droplet deformation in the direction of
ﬂow is expressed in terms of the dimensionless distortion
y = 2Ddmin/(do/2), where Ddmin describes the deviation of the
minor drop diameter (or the one parallel to the direction of the
ﬂow or drop relative velocity) from its undisturbed value do (see
Fig. 3).
The equation of motion of the deformation and a general
solution are5
d2y
dt2 þ 4Cdm
rd2
dy
dt þ 8Cks
rd3 y ¼ 4C frairV2
rel
Cbrd2
and
yðtÞ ¼ Wec
þ et=tD
ðyo þ WecÞcosvt þ 1
v
dyo
dt þ yo  Wec
tD
 

sinvt
 

Here Wec ¼ Weðc f =ckcbÞ ¼ ðrairV2
reld=2sÞðc f =ckcbÞ, natural fre-
quency 
and 
damping 
time 
of 
drop 
oscillations 
are v ¼
fð8Cks=rd3Þ  ð1=t2
DÞg
1=2
and tD = (rd2/2Cdm) . Cb = 1/2, Cd = 10,
Ck = 8 and Cf = 2/3 (gradual loading) or 1/3 (sudden loading) are
empirical model parameters. The initial values of distortion yo and
distortion rate of change dyo/dt are usually taken to be equal to zero
[30]. 
The 
drop 
aspect 
ratio 
and 
projected 
area 
are 
thus
AR ¼ ð1  0:5yÞ3=2

and A = pd2/4(1  0.5y) respectively.
The numerical representation of the drop distortion and
distortion rate used for the code development are given in
Appendix A.
4.1. Drag coefﬁcient of a deformed drop
There are a number of possibilities of how to express the drag
coefﬁcient as a function of drop shape and Re number [21,30–32].
An initially spherical drop in an external ﬂow at critical conditions
reaches a maximum deformation when it takes the form of a disk
(so-called ‘liquid disk’). The drag coefﬁcient of a deformed drop can
be estimated by interpolating between that of a sphere CS ph
D
and of
a disk CDisk
D
[21,32]: CD ¼ AR CS ph
D
þ ð1  ARÞCDisk
D
. For a sphere
AR = 1, whereas, for a thin disk AR  0.
The empirical expressions for the drag coefﬁcient of a solid
sphere and disk for wide range of Reynolds numbers used in this
study can be found in [20,33] and are given in Appendix B.
5. Drop breakup models
As soon as the maximum deformation is reached and the
droplet is disk-like, a drop may further deform and ﬁnally
disintegrate into smaller or child drops [23]. Two breakup
mechanisms, namely bag-type at 12  We  50 and vibrational
at We  12 breakup, are characteristic for typical blood drops. Two
other mechanisms, multimode and shear breakup, may occur for
gunshot drops if conditions of We > 50 are encountered.
Two alternative models for drop breakup modeling were built
into the developed numerical scheme to estimate the level of drop
deformation prior to the breakup.
The ﬁrst was based on the experimental ﬁndings of [23] for
drops disintegrating after a shock wave disturbance. In the
proposed model a drop was considered to undergo breakup when
the droplet Weber number is larger than a critical Weber number
Wecr = 12(1 + 0.077Oh1.6) ([1,32]; [23].
The model suggests that the maximum cross-sectional drop
deformation is dmax = do(1 + 0.19We0.5). The instantaneous cross
stream drop diameter dc is estimated as a function of time t of drop
deformation from the liquid disk distortion up to a drop breakup in
a form dc = (dmax  do)0.625(t/t) + do, where t ¼ ðdo=VrelÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r=rair
p
is the characteristic time of drop breakup for Oh < 0.1. It is
assumed that the maximum drop deformation is reached at
ti = 1.6t. After that, a drop undergoes further irregular deformation
(into a liquid bag, for example) and ﬁnally disintegrates. The time
of drop breakup from the beginning of the deformation to drop’s
ﬁnal disintegration is represented as tbup = 6t(We  12)0.25 for
12 < We  18 and tbup = 2.45t(We  12)0.25 for 18  We < 45 at
Oh  1 [1].
The deformed drop aspect ratio and projected area are AR ¼
d3
o=d3
c and A ¼ ðp=4Þd2
c correspondingly. Thus the model allows
estimation of the instantaneous drop deformation at a time after
the drop breakup condition had been met, hence allowing a
prediction of when ﬁnal breakup occurs.
For 
the 
typical 
case 
of 
bag-type 
breakup, 
actual 
drop
disintegration was expected to occur anytime in the second
half of the interval from ti to tbup. In the numerical implementation
of the model, a random time of breakup in a characteristic
time frame is calculated using random number generator rand() in
C++.
The ﬁnal drop cross-sectional diameter was calculated subse-
quently. Using this distortion value, a ﬁnal drop velocity and
coordinates were calculated.
Another drop breakup model employed was based on the
breakup model which is part of the TAB model. For this the
amplitude of undamped drop oscillations was ﬁrst calculated with
A ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðyn  WecÞ2 þ ðð1=vÞðdy=dtÞnÞ
2
q
where yn and (dy/dt)n are the
dimensionless drop deformation and deformation rate at nth time
step. Drop breakup was considered to be possible only if
WeC + A > 1 and y 	 1.
The drop was assumed to maintain its level of deformation
(aspect ratio) as soon as it reached its critical deformation, up until
the completion of the breakup.
If the condition for drop disintegration was met, the lifetime of
an 
unstable 
drop 
was 
calculated 
alternatively 
as
tbu p ¼ 0:82
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3rd3o=8s
p

[29] and tbu p ¼ p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rd3o=16s
p
[34] or accord-
ing to [1] discussed earlier. Pilch and Erdman’s expression for the
drop breakup time was found to be the most accurate in predicting
blood drop breakup.
If tbup  Dt the breakup was considered to occur during the
current time step. However, if tbup > Dt the breakup would not
occur during the current time step and the drop distortion and
distortion rate are recalculated on the next time step n + 1
(Appendix A).
6. Experimental methodology
6.1. Blood used
For the study of blood drops falling from up to 8 m, healthy
donor human blood with EDTA anticoagulant was used. Blood
density 
was 
determined 
by 
the 
weighing 
method 
to 
be
1028 
 25 kg/m3. Blood viscosity and surface tension were not
4 The important limitation of the TAB model is that only the longest-lived
fundamental (spheroidal or prolate-oblate) mode of drop oscillations is accounted
for. This is reasonable as the low-viscosity drop oscillations are generally limited to
the ﬁrst few harmonics due to rapid damping of higher harmonics. Several non-
linear TAB model extensions have been recently developed by Schmehl [32] and
claimed to be more accurate in large drop distortion prediction. These may be used
for blood drop applications if higher level of accuracy is required.
5 The equation of motion of the deformation for the case of ‘‘backward’’ drop
motion had the sign of the ﬁrst time derivative from drop distortion y reversed.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
111


--- PAGE 6 ---

measured. It was expected, however, that due to the fact that the
blood used was of a healthy donor its viscosity and surface tension
were within the range reported for healthy humans [35–37].
To investigate the early stage of passive blood drop ﬂight for
drops 
falling 
up 
to 
1.5 m 
porcine 
blood, 
sourced 
from 
a
slaughterhouse was used as a human blood substitute. Blood
from the same sample was used for impact spatter experiments.
The blood was treated with ACD (acid citrate dextrose) anticoagu-
lant at a concentration of 7 mg/ml. Measured blood density and
surface tension were 1033 
 20 kg/m3 and 61.7 
 0.8 mN/m corre-
spondingly. Blood viscosity was measured to 4.6 
 0.1 mN s/m2 at
high shear rate (1000 s1) and to 21.3 
 0.6 mN s/m2 at low shear rate
(10 s1). Blood density was measured by a weighing syringe method.
Surface tension measurements were performed on a KSV Contact
Angle and Surface Tension Meter. Blood viscosities were measured at
a shear rate of 1000 s1 with a rotational rheometer HAAKE Rotovisco
RV 20 with NV coaxial cylinders. ACD treated abattoir porcine blood
with density, surface tension and high-shear rate viscosity of
1054 
 25 kg/m3, 63.8 
 1.6 mN/m and 5.0 
 0.7 mN s/m2 respec-
tively was used for the cast-off experiments The blood used for each
of the experiments was warmed to 36 
 1 8C and agitated by a
magnetic heater-stirrer before testing. It was stored at 4 8C and used
within 4 days.
6.2. Blood drop generation and imaging
High-speed imaging was used to study passive, cast-off and
impact blood drop ﬂight characteristics. A Photron SA1.1 high
speed digital (CMOS) cameras with a Nikon 55mm f/2.8 AIS Micro-
NIKKOR macro lens were used to capture high resolution (with ﬁne
details) images of blood drops at high frame rates, the number or
frequency of images or frames taken per second (fps). Camera
settings and image magniﬁcation levels (distance calibration,
number of image pixels per 1 mm) employed for the imaging
experiments performed are summarized in Table 2. Photron
FASTCAM Viewer Ver.3.0 (Photron Ltd.) software was used to
operate the camera.
6.3. Passive drops
To study blood drops at velocities close to terminal, drops in the
range of 3–5 mm in diameter were produced using Pasteur
pipettes with different tip sizes. The drops were then released from
a number of heights indoors to limit the effects of air currents and
winds on drop ﬂight. Ambient temperature was 21 
 1 8C. Each
meter of drop ﬂight (starting at 2 m of fall) was imaged. The fall
distance of the drops was measured with a tape measure to within

5 cm. A set of close-up videos of drops were also captured to
measure drop diameters. Each test was repeated three times. The
experimental set up was back- and side-lit from both sides by 0.5–
2 kW incandescent lamps. A distance calibration (pixels/mm) was
made using an image of a 1 m long ruler. The ruler was mounted
vertically in the ﬁeld of view of the camera. Both the ruler and falling
drops were expected to be within the camera depth of ﬁeld.
For the study of initial blood drop oscillations a Gilson Minipuls
3 M312 (Gilson Ltd.) peristaltic pump was used to draw the liquid
from a reservoir ﬂask to the experiment. A constant ﬂow rate of
0.10 
 0.02 ml/s (measured by weighing) was maintained. Blood
drops were formed by dripping from a number of stainless steel
objects to produce a range of drop sizes. These included a 21G
Ø0.8 mm blunt hypodermic needle, SWAGELOCK1 hose connector
with a 5 mm outer tube diameter, a kitchen knife and a 100 mm
diameter cylinder. The objects were at ambient temperature of
19.0 
 0.5 8C.
The drops were allowed to fall 1.5 m in total. Owing to the
image magniﬁcation necessary to accurately determine drop size
and shape, 10 cm of drop ﬂight was imaged at a time. Drop fall
distance was measured to 
5 cm. Drop images upon its formation,
and after 20, 50, 100 and 150 cm of fall were taken with 10–15
repeats. The set up was back-lit with 8 LED lights.
6.4. Cast-off drops
Cast-off drops were generated from a 60 cm diameter ﬂat
rotating stainless steel disk [38]. The disk rotated clockwise about
its symmetry axis, with the plane of the disk vertical. The speed of
rotation was regulated by a single phase AC motor with a variable
speed drive, with tangential velocity in the range of 1–20 m/s
within 0.5 m/s.
A KNF Flodos diaphragm pump NF 60 was used to eject 2 ml of
blood on the rotating disk surface for each experimental trial. The
blood was fed onto the disk surface, at the lower part of the disk
1 cm from the edge.
The drops back-lit with eleven high-intensity LED lights were
imaged in ﬂight. The drops were observed to move in the plane of
the disk with maximum deviation of about 
1–1.5 cm. The camera
was focused on the plane of the disk. Only the drops that stayed in
focus until they left the ﬁeld of view were analyzed.
A set of experiments with close-up imaging were performed to
study the initial phase of cast-off drop ﬂight including shape
oscillations. The recorded trajectory during close-up imaging was
limited to less than 4 cm. It was experimentally difﬁcult to
determine drop sizes and track any shape changes over a meaningful
length of trajectory and number of oscillation periods for the smaller
cast-off drops generated at the higher tangential velocities (>6–7 m/
s). Thus the study was limited to the lower tangential velocities.
Additional experiments were dedicated to capturing longer drop
trajectories to allow a comparison with the numerical predictions. The
typical ﬁeld of view for these experiments was about 55 cm  55 cm
which corresponded to 60–70 cm length of imaged drop trajectory.
However, the resolution was decreased to about 30 cm  30 cm (or
40 cm of drop trajectory) at disk tangential velocities higher than
15 m/s in order to accurately determine blood drop size.
6.5. Impact drops
The generation of blood drops as a result of a blunt force impact
was studied. A pneumatic cylinder (actuator) drove a piston and
Table 2
Camera settings and typical image magniﬁcation used for passive, cast-off and impact blood drop imaging.
Experiment 
High-speed camera settings 
Typical image magniﬁcation,
pixels/mm
Frame rate, fps 
Resolution, pixels 
Shutter speed, s
Passive drops falling up to 8 m 
5000 
256  1024 
1/6000 
0.8–1 (close-up)
14–16 (drop ﬂight)
Initial passive drop oscillations 
5400 
1024  1024 
1/75,000 
8–10
Cast-off drops 
5400 
1024  1024 
1/75,000 
9–15 (close-up)
2 (drop ﬂight)
Impact spatter 
5400 
1024  1024 
1/75,000 
5–9
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
112


--- PAGE 7 ---

the attached rod to vertically impact a target surface. The target
was a 5 cm diameter polyurethane block with a ﬂat impact surface.
The actuator and target were ﬁrmly mounted on a durable 6 cm
thick wooden bench. The stroke length was about 7 cm. The rod tip
was ﬁtted with a 2 cm diameter steel tip, similar to a 16 oz. claw
hammer head. The impactor tip speed at time of impact varied
from 9 to 14 m/s.
2.0 
 0.2 ml of blood was applied on the target for each
experiment. A 32 cm  32 cm region close to the point of impact
was imaged. The drops were back-lit with 5 LED lights.
The impact of the tip onto the pool of blood caused the blood to
disintegrate into a dense mist of drops, moving radially outward
from the impact center. Only drops which passed through a 5 mm
wide vertical slit between the point of impact and imaged region
were recorded to eliminate drop movement perpendicular to the
camera object plane.
The images of all passive and cast-off drops were processed
using MATLAB1
based 
particle identiﬁcation 
and 
tracking
software. 
After 
conversion 
to 
grayscale, 
the 
images 
were
binarized (recognized as bright objects on dark background)
using a threshold value of 80–100 gray levels.6 The drop image
properties such as coordinates, diameter and aspect ratio were
measured. The droplets were then tracked over time using [39]
implementation of the IDL particle tracking algorithms developed
by [40]. Drop velocity was calculated from a drop displacement
(D) during two subsequent frames and video frame rate (FR) as
D  FR. Impact blood drop images were processed using ImageJ, a
public-domain Java image processing and analysis program. The
drop ﬂight paths were manually recreated with ROI Manager in
ImageJ.
7. Veriﬁcation and validation
The developed numerical code was veriﬁed and validated
against a number of analytical and experimental datasets of
spherical and deformable drop ﬂight, with particular attention to
sizes and velocities relevant for typical blood drops.
A number of subroutines of the developed code needed to be
validated, namely:
(1) drop velocity and coordinates calculation;
(2) drag coefﬁcient of a deformed drop representation;
(3) drop deformation, oscillation and breakup modeling.
The accuracy of the drop equation of motion solution and drop
deformation representation was sufﬁcient for the validity of the
developed numerical code for blood drop trajectory prediction
within model assumptions (i.e. axisymmetric drop, translational
motion, prolate-oblate oscillations, no evaporation or cross-winds,
etc.).
The description of the validation process was accompanied with
empirical 
observations 
on 
passive 
blood 
drop 
deformation,
oscillations and terminal velocities, cast-off drop deformation
and oscillations and impact drop deformation and breakup of value
to BPA community.
7.1. Validation of drop velocity and coordinates calculation and
deformed drop drag coefﬁcient representation
In order to verify the accuracy of drop velocity components and
coordinates calculation subroutines of the program it was tested
against simpliﬁed cases of undeformed (spherical) drop ﬂight with
and without air resistance. The numerical results were found to
match exactly the analytical solutions of the kinematic equations
of drop motion without air resistance for:
(1) a projectile launched horizontally from height H with initial
velocity components vox ¼ vo; voy ¼ 0 : vx ¼ vo; vy ¼ gt; x ¼ vot;
y ¼ gt2=2; with ﬁnal ﬂight time T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2H=g
p
and range L ¼ voT;
(2) a projectile launched under the initial angle to horizon ao and
velocity 
vo : vx ¼ vocosao; vy ¼ vosinao  gt; x ¼ vot cos ao þ
xo; y ¼ vosin ao  gt2=2;
(3) spherical drop ﬂight at terminal conditions (when drag force is
balanced by the drop weight) in ambient air with terminal
velocity vt ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð4dog=3CdÞððr  raÞ=raÞ
p
, Cd = 0.5.
The drag coefﬁcient interpolation used for deformed drop
representation was probed against experimentally obtained drag
coefﬁcients and aspect ratios of water drops at terminal velocity
from Pruppacher and Pitter [41] (Fig. 4). This showed the good
accuracy of the interpolation formula used.7
7.2. Validation of the models for drop deformation, oscillations and
breakup
7.2.1. Passive blood drop deformation at terminal velocity
The models of drop deformation (based on Green [28],
[23] 
and 
the 
TAB 
model) 
reproduced 
empirical 
terminal
velocities and deformation levels of water drops within less
than 10% for drops up to 5 mm in diameter (Fig. 5). The most
accurate ﬁt to the experimental data was provided by the TAB
model with an aerodynamic force coefﬁcient Cf = 2/7 over the
entire range of drop diameters studied. The models based on
Green [28] and [23] predicted terminal velocities higher than
reported experimentally for water drops with diameters >6 mm.
The TAB model and that based on [28] provided a good
approximation of drop deformation levels at terminal conditions
for a wide range of drop sizes. The HF model, however,
overestimated drop deformation for drops less than 8 mm in
diameter.
The validity of the code when predicting blood drop ﬂight at
conditions close to terminal was tested against experimental data
on drops falling from up to 8 m.
From close-up drop images, falling drop diameters with standard
deviations were 3.31 
 0.01 mm (‘small’), 4.44 
 0.05 mm (‘medium’)
and 4.94 
 0.04 mm (‘large’). The error in drop diameter measurement
associated with image pixelation and thresholding was estimated to be
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Cd
Re
Cd from Pruppacher and
 
 Pitter
 
 (1970
 
)
Cd of a spher 
e
Cd of a dis c
Inte rpolat ed Cd
Fig. 4. Interpolated and experimentally obtained [41] drag coefﬁcients for drops at
terminal velocities with the sphere and disk drag coefﬁcients from Clift et al. [20]
and Massey et al. [33].
6 Kabaliuk [62] contains additional information on the effect of threshold values
on the measured drop diameter.
7 The 
interpolation 
is 
valid 
provided 
the 
validity 
of 
drop 
deformation
representation irrespective of the speciﬁcs of drop movement (or drop type in
BPA context).
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
113


--- PAGE 8 ---


3 pixels (or 
0.2 mm) for close-up images. The accuracy of drop
diameter determination for drop ﬂight videos was limited by image
resolution, which amounted to 1 pixel size (or 
1 mm).
The velocity of the falling drops was observed to increase from
about 5–6 m/s at 2 m of fall to 8–9 m/s at 9 m. The time-dependent
evolution of falling drop velocity for the larger drops studied was
plotted in Fig. 6. Scatter of 
3–4 m/s observed in the raw data was
associated with an uncertainty in drop location (center of mass)
determination from pixilated and thresholded images of 
5 m/s.
Drop fall analogous to that studied experimentally was
modeled using the developed code. The experimentally measured
blood drop size and density were used for computation. As the
viscosity and surface tension of the blood were not measured,
published values of human blood viscosity of 4 mN s/m2 (at high
shear rate) and surface tension of 62 mN/m ([35,37]) were used.8
All the models for drop deformation during ﬂight (based on
Green [28],[23] and TAB) performed well when predicting drop fall
velocity and consequently drop deformation levels which affect
drag force and drop trajectory (or velocity in the case of drop fall).
Numerical velocity predictions were within 5% of the mean of the
experimental data.
Numerical simulation for the case of a spherical blood drop (‘‘No
deformation’’ dataset) with a drag coefﬁcient dependent on
Reynolds number predicted higher drop velocities compared to
the 
models 
with 
drop 
deformation, 
and 
higher 
than 
the
experimental mean, although within the scatter of experimental
data. The discrepancy, however, was observed only for fall
distances higher than about 4 m.
When the drag force was entirely neglected (‘‘No drag’’ dataset),
the predicted velocities deviated substantially from those of a
droplet experiencing drag by the time it had fallen 1.5 m. It is rare
for a passive blood drop to fall (vertically) much more than 1.5 m at
a crime scene. Such a short travel distance (and time of ﬂight)
would not allow a passive drop to experience any signiﬁcant drag
force effects and deformation to alter its ﬂight velocity (and thus,
impact velocity) under typical crime scene conditions.
7.2.2. Initial oscillations of passive blood drops
The 
early 
stage 
of 
passive 
blood 
drop 
ﬂight 
was 
also
experimentally and numerically studied. Initial oscillation ampli-
tude and damping rate for drops falling up to 1.5 m were
investigated.
The drops formed from the objects tested ranged from 1 to
6 mm in diameter (see Table 3). Blood dripping from the
hypodermic needle and kitchen knife generally produced uni-
form-size drops (main or primary drops). For the case of a dripping
hose connector and cylinder, the primary drop was followed by one
or rarely two (or more) smaller droplets (termed ‘accompanying
drops’ or ‘satellite drops’). Initial oscillations of the needle, knife,
hose connector and cylinder primary drops as well as uniform-
sized hose connector satellite drops were investigated.
The primary drops were tracked as soon as the breakup from
the ligament was commenced and the body of a drop could be
differentiated from the residual liquid adhering to the dripping
surface. Upon formation the drops experienced shape oscillations
with axisymmetric mode predominating.
The satellite drops studied were formed as a result of the break-
off a highly elongated liquid ligament (length to width ratio of
about 10) from the residual liquid and its subsequent strong
contraction. The presence of a horizontal oscillation mode (see
[42]) was noticed for the ﬁrst ten to ﬁfteen frames (or about 5 mm).
This may be attributed to the mode-coupling phenomena noted by
[47].
Most of the passive blood drops possessed a prolate shape upon
detachment, whereas the drops formed from the cylinder were
oblate (at the time of recognition).
Fig. 5. Comparison of numerical and empirical terminal velocities and corresponding deformation levels for water drops. The lower four data sets represent numerical
predictions. [50–54]
0
3
6
9
12
0 
2.5 
5 
7.5 
10
Drop velocity, m/s
Distance
 
 of  fall
 
, m
Expe
 
rimental
 
 data 
 Dataset
 
 extremes
No drag forc e 
No deformati on, Cd=f(Re)
AR from Gree n (1975)
AR
 
 fr om Hsia
 
ng and
 
 Faet
 
h (1995 )
TAB model
Green 
 (1975)
 
,
Hsia ng and  Faet h 
(1995) an d TAB 
models
 
 
No drag
No defor
 
matio
 
n
Fig. 6. Empirical and numerical fall velocity of a Ø4.94 mm passive blood drop. The
dataset extreme line was ﬁtted through the measured velocity data extreme points.
The black points are the moving average of the processed data.
8 It should be pointed that a change in simulated blood drop viscosity over the
range of its natural variability caused no detectable difference in blood drop fall
velocity (less than 1/10,000%). A decrease in drop surface tension from 62 to 55 mN/
m led to a less than 2% decrease in drop fall velocity. Measured blood density was
slightly lower than published values. However, from the simulation a 3% increase in
drop density from measured 1028 to 1063 kg/m3 (upper level for human blood)
increased drop velocity only by about 1%.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
114


--- PAGE 9 ---

Aspect ratios of the representative oscillating drops were
plotted in Fig. 7 for the initial stages of ﬂight where drop
deformation by aerodynamic forces is less prominent due to low
Weber numbers (We << 1). 
The drops oscillated 
around a
spherical shape (AR  1) with viscous damping reducing the
amplitude and the shape tending to spherical over time.
The mean error in drop aspect ratio determination from ellipse-
ﬁtting was less than 1%. It should be noted that the ﬁtting error for
the ﬁrst ten frames of the strongly deformed satellite droplet
reached 3%, but reduced for the following images. The uncertainty
in drop location determination from the high-speed images was

1 mm.
The primary drops experienced moderate- to small-amplitude
oscillations with the dimensionless drop distortion y < 0.4 and
j1  ARj  0.3. The satellite drops oscillated with higher ampli-
tudes (y  0.8 and j1  ARj  0.9).
A comparison of the measured period and frequency of drop
oscillations with theoretical predictions by ([43]; cf. [44]) for
small-amplitude oscillations of a low-viscosity liquid drop in air is
provided in Fig. 8. The oscillation frequency and decay time for the
fundamental harmonic are v ¼ fð64s=rd3
oÞ  ð20m=rd2
oÞ
2g
1=2
and
tD ¼ ðrd2
o=20mÞ. Surface tension increases drop oscillation fre-
quency as s1/2. The effect of an increase in drop density is mainly
due to an increase the oscillation decay time and to a decrease in
oscillation frequency proportionally to r1/2. The drop viscosity m
decreases the natural oscillation frequency and damps the
oscillations. As blood is a non-Newtonian ﬂuid its viscosity
depends on the shear rate of the ﬂow. To deﬁne the apparent
viscosity of an oscillating blood drop in an air ﬂow, the ﬂow pattern
and shear rates within the drop must be determined. The latter is a
complex problem and was out of scope of this study.
Larger drops studied were observed to oscillate with lower
frequencies and thus had longer periods. The frequency and period
of oscillation of the largest drop studied (5.83 mm in diameter,
from the cylinder) was about 134.7 
 0.4 Hz and 47 
 3 ms
respectively, whereas the needle drops (half as large) had an
oscillation frequency three times higher of 435 
 1 Hz and a shorter
oscillation period of 14 
 2 ms. Empirical and theoretical oscillation
frequencies (and periods) were in good agreement. This is in
concordance with the ﬁndings of [45] that the asymptotic behavior
of small and moderate low-viscosity drop oscillations can be well
predicted by the linear theory [44].
The 
shift 
in 
oscillation 
frequency 
of 
the 
satellite 
drop
oscillations may be associated with the decrease in oscillation
frequency of the fundamental mode with increasing amplitude
[46,47]. Indeed energy transfer between the fundamental and
higher modes (mode coupling) during high-amplitude oscillations
changes the energy balance of the fundamental mode. Another
possible explanation is the error in drop size estimation, which is
critical during rapid oscillations.
As the velocity of a passive drop increases (We 	 1) with the
distance of fall, aerodynamic effects on drop deformation become
more pronounced. The equilibrium drop aspect ratio shifts from
that of a spherical drop (AR = 1) toward the values for an oblate
spheroid (AR < 1). This was observed experimentally for the
passive blood drops. The deformations naturally were more
pronounced for the larger drops which also showed a non-
elliptical proﬁle with ﬂattening at the bottom surface facing the
ﬂow (Fig. 9). It should be noted that the hose drops still showed
some oscillations after 1.5 m of fall.
A comparison between the experimental and numerical data on
drop oscillation from the moment of drop formation is presented in
Fig. 10 for the hose connector drops.
The analytical solution for the free drop oscillation around a
spherical shape [48] AR ¼ ½1 þ Aoet=tDsinðvtÞ
3 is shown in
Fig. 10. It models passive blood drop oscillation accurately up to
the third period. The parameter A0 = 0.08 was used to match
experimentally observed drop oscillation data.
As the Weber number of drop ﬂight exceeded 0.4 at 0.15 s of fall,
drop behavior deviated from that predicted by the free oscillation
theory. As the drop velocity increased due to the action of gravity
the drop started to deform under the increased aerodynamic
loading and oscillated around an equilibrium deformed shape.
With further gradual rise in the aerodynamic loading the drop
further deformed. The amplitude of oscillation was damped with
time by viscous forces.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0 
0.0 1 
0.0 2 
0.03
AR
Fall  distance, m
satel lite  drop
needle drop
knife  drop
connect or drop
cylinder drop
satellite dro
 
p
needle dro
 
p
knife drop
connector
 
 drop
cylinde
 
r dro
 
p
Fig. 7. Initial oscillations of passive blood drops observed experimentally.
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
2
4 
6
Period of oscillations, ms
Oscillation frequency, Hz
Drop diameter,
 
 mm
oscillation frequ
 
ency
 
 (Lamb,
 
 1932
 
)
period
 
 of  oscill 
ati ons  (Lamb,
 
 1932
 
)
satellite drop
needle
 
 drop
knife  drop
con
 
nect or drop
cylinder drop
Fig. 8. Frequency and period of passive blood drop oscillations.
Fig. 9. Passive blood drop shapes and aspect ratios after 1.5 m of fall: (a) satellite, (b)
needle and (c) hose connector drops. Standard deviation of the aspect ratio
measurements was 
0.3.
Table 3
Passive blood drop diameters for initial blood drop oscillation study. The error in
drop diameter measurement due to image pixilation and thresholding was 
1 pixel
(or 
0.11 mm).
Dripping object 
Drop diameter,
mm
Standard deviation,
mm
Needle 
2.83 
0.01
Knife 
3.96 
0.11
Hose connector
Primary 
5.34 
0.06
Satellite 
1.25 
0.08
Cylinder 
5.83 
0.15
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
115


--- PAGE 10 ---

The simulation of the initial drop oscillation based on the TAB
model and empirical data on drop sizes, properties, initial
distortion levels and rates provided accurate prediction of the
passive drop behavior during ﬂight beginning from the moment of
its formation.
Measured blood drop density and surface tension values were
incorporated into the TAB model. Variations in the blood surface
tension and density in the range of the instrumental errors had
negligible effect on the numerical results. The value of apparent
drop viscosity was selected from the measured and published data
[35,36] by matching the experimental and numerical oscillation
decay times. The viscosity value of 10 mN s/m2 (for the shear rate
of 10 s1) provided the most satisfactory data ﬁt and was used for
simulations.
The maximum relative error in drop aspect ratio values
predicted numerically to that observed experimentally was about
1.6% for the ﬁrst period of drop oscillation which may be associated
with the errors in the assumed shape of the newly formed drop.
The empirical levels of drop deformation after about 0.5 s (or
1.5 m) of fall were slightly lower (5%) than those calculated
numerically with the TAB model based on the critical Weber
number Wecr = 12 for shock loading [23,26] with Cf = 1/3. To
improve the agreement the value of Cf = 2/7, corresponding to
slightly higher Wecr = 14, reasonable for a gradual increase in the
aerodynamic loading, was employed in the computation. The TAB
model with Cf = 2/7 performed well for all the primary drops
studied experimentally. The relative errors in drop fall velocity and
distance between the numerical approximation and experimental
data was generally smaller than 0.5%.
The steady state solution (without drop shape oscillation and
initial 
distortion) 
for 
falling 
passive 
blood 
drops 
was 
also
investigated. It should be noted that the deviation between the
numerical solutions for an initially deformed, oscillating drop and
the one for initially spherical, non-oscillating drop was negligibly
small (<1/1000%) when predicting the evolution of drop fall
velocity, distance and time. This may suggest that the effect of
drop initial oscillation and distortion from sphericity on its ﬂight
characteristics is negligibly small. Thus for all problems, other than
the initial drop shape oscillation prediction, a passive blood drop can
be modeled by an initially undisturbed non-oscillating drop
undergoing deformation during ﬂight under the aerodynamic forces.
7.2.3. Cast-off drop deformation and oscillations
Blood 
drops 
cast-off 
from 
a 
rotating 
disk 
served 
as 
a
complementary validation case. Drop oscillations and deformation
levels were examined.
The cast-off drops studied ranged in size from 0.4 to 4 mm in
diameter and possessed velocities of 1–15 m/s. The uncertainty in
drop diameter measurement due to image pixilation and thresh-
olding was less than or equal to 
0.11 mm for close-up images or

0.5 mm for longer drop trajectory videos. The uncertainty in drop
velocity measurements was 
0.4 m/s and less than 
2 m/s respec-
tively.
A liquid mass adheres to the surface of the disk by interfacial
tension forces. If these forces are weaker than the centripetal force
required to keep it rotating at the disk speed, the mass will break
up into drops which ﬂy off tangentially. Gravity also acts.
The blood deposited on to the lower disk surface was observed
to move to and accumulate on the disk edge. As blood accumulated
at the edge, the weight of the adhering mass and the centripetal
force required to keep it rotating with the disk increased. When the
interfacial force was no longer sufﬁcient, an adhering drop started
to elongate and formed a liquid neck. The orientation of the liquid
neck axis of symmetry changed during disk rotation and as the
liquid mass increased. During the early stages of drop formation
the axis was oriented perpendicularly to the tangent to the disk
circumference at the point of drop contact. Later it further
elongated and tilted from being perpendicular to the disk tangent.
When the liquid neck narrowed enough it broke up in one or
several places generally producing a primary drop and one or more
accompanying or satellite drops. After the drop detached, some
quantity of liquid was left adhering to the disk surface. As long as
the liquid ﬂow rate was sufﬁcient this liquid would undergo
subsequent similar stages of drop formation (see Fig. 11).
At lower disk velocities (up to about 6 m/s) the drops tended to
detach from the lower part of the rotating disk whereas at higher
rotational speeds (and thus higher centripetal forces required for
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
0 
0.2
0.
 
4 
0.6
AR
Time, s
 Experime
 
ntal  dat a
TAB model
Raylei gh, 1892
TAB model
 
 (no 
 osc 
illation)
Fig. 10. Experimental and numerical results for the initial oscillation of a 5.34 mm
diameter passive blood drop. Initial distortion yo and distortion rate ˙yo used for the
simulation were 0.076 and 55 s1 correspondingly).
Fig. 11. Superimposition of cast-off drop images. The disk rotates clockwise.
y = 0.420
 
6x2 - 2.1704x
 
 + 2.827
 
1
R² = 0.836
 
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
1
2
3
4
We
Drop diameter,
 
 mm
Experiment
Fig. 12. Weber number for the 0.4–4 mm cast-off drops studied.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
116


--- PAGE 11 ---

adhesion) the detachment region extended to the whole disk
perimeter.
Once released, the primary and accompanying cast-off drops
continued to move away from the disk with velocities similar to
the tangential velocity of the disk. The initial trajectory was
tangential to the disk.
While in ﬂight the drops experienced shape oscillations due to
the unbalanced surface tension forces at the time of release. Most
of the primary cast-off drops detached with a prolate spheroidal
shape (with j1  ARj0 < 0.2). They oscillated with moderate to
small amplitude with the dimensionless drop distortion (y < 0.4
and j1  ARj  0.3) and damping rates within the range seen in
passive dripping. This suggested that the initial oscillations of this
type of drops may be successfully modeled with the numerical
scheme that performed well for the passive blood drops oscillation
simulation discussed above.
The size of the primary drops cast off from the disk decreased as
the rotational velocity increased. The ligament length, on the
contrary, increased with the speed of rotation. The longer
ligaments, consequently, produced higher numbers of smaller
diameter satellite drops.
As the relatively larger cast-off drops formed at lower velocities,
and drops that possessed higher velocities were signiﬁcantly
smaller in size, the initial Weber numbers of the cast-off drops
remained low (<3). Moreover, as each drop was formed it would
decelerate (and thus the We number of its ﬂight would decrease)
due to the combined action of air resistance and gravitational force.
Such low Weber numbers for cast-off drops (see Fig. 12) indicate
low deformation levels during ﬂight which are unlikely to
inﬂuence the drop’s ﬂight path and/or velocity at the moment
of impact on a surface. Breakup in ﬂight is highly unlikely.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
-1 
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
1
Y, m
X, m
disk
We = 0.4
Cd=f(R e) (W
 
e = 0.4)
TAB (We = 0.4)
We = 2
TAB (We = 2)
Cd=f(R e) (W
 
e = 2)
0.8
1
1.2
0.2 
0.6 
1
Fig. 13. Empirical (bold solid and dashed black lines) and numerical cast-off blood drop trajectories at We = 0.4 and 2.
Fig. 14. Highly deformed impact drops observed: a–d = 1.4 mm, AR = 0.67, We = 9.7; b – 0.9 mm, 0.86, 5.6; c – ‘liquid bag’ 1.54 mm, 0.75, 10.4; d – 0.68 mm, 0.92, 4.6; e –
0.9 mm, 0.86, 5.8; f – 1.6 mm, 0.37, 9; g – ‘liquid bag’ 1.5 mm, 0.6, 8.4.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0 
2.5
5
7.
 
5 
10 
12.5 
15
Drop aspect ratio
We number
Experimen
 
tal  dat
 
a
Brandes
 
 et  al.  (2 002 )
Fig. 15. Aspect ratios versus Weber numbers for impact drops studied.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
117


--- PAGE 12 ---

Experimental and numerical trajectories of cast-off blood drops
for representative We numbers of 0.4 and 2 were compared
(Fig. 
13). 
The 
Weber 
number 
of 
0.4 
(black 
dashed 
line)
corresponded to a 1.46 mm drop with an initial velocity of
3.8 m/s, which detached from the disk rotating at 4 m/s. We = 2
(black solid line) was the highest We for which adequately long
trajectories were captured experimentally. This corresponded to a
0.48 mm blood drop cast off from the disk rotating at 15 m/s with
the velocity upon detachment of 14.8 m/s.
Numerical 
solutions 
were 
computed 
with 
the 
spherical
(Cd = f(Re)) model and deformable (TAB model) blood drop
trajectories for comparison. Both models provided an accurate
prediction of the observed drop ﬂight giving evidence of their
validity, at least over the length of trajectories studied, for cast-off
drop ﬂight modeling.
The simulation was sensitive to the initial input data such as
drop size, velocity and angle to the horizontal line which were
measured with ﬁnite uncertainties. In order to corroborate the
accuracy of the model, both drop trajectory and velocity evolution
over the duration of imaging were compared to the experimental
results. The maximum relative errors in drop position and velocity
were less than 2%, which is within the experimental uncertainties.
When the trajectory predictions from the TAB model and the
Cd = f(Re) model for a spherical (undeformed) drop were continued
until the moment of drop impact onto a horizontal surface (y = 0)
for the low We number ﬂight, the predicted drop height and range
(vertical and horizontal distances traversed since separation, 0.8
and 1.5 m respectively) were within 1 cm and the impact velocity
was within less than 0.6%. For the higher We the numerical solution
for a deformable drop predicted a shift in drop trajectory from that
of a spherical drop, with faster drop deceleration. The latter
resulted in a smaller ﬂight range and lower impact velocity. The
deviation, however, was less than 4% (2.2 cm) for the ﬂight range
studied (1.53 m) and 0.1% for the velocity at impact.
It is, however, an item for future work to investigate the
possibility of the formation of bigger cast-off drops from real
sharp- and blunt-tip weapons at higher swing velocities which
would possess higher We numbers and deformation levels.
7.2.4. Impact drop deformation and breakup
Impact drops studied ranged from 0.1 mm (limited by the
image resolution and magniﬁcation) up to 2 mm in diameter (see
Fig. 14 for examples). Measured initial drop velocities were 14–
25 
 0.5 m/s.
Drop aspect ratios were plotted against ﬂight Weber numbers
(Fig. 15). The aspect ratio (AR) and We numbers plotted are the
average values over the ﬁrst 3–5 frames of drop ﬂight. Error bars
for the aspect ratio values are equal to two standard deviations.
The uncertainties in We were calculated from the uncertainties of
drop size and velocity.
The correlation for the aspect ratios of drops at terminal
velocities 
AR ¼ 0:9951 þ 2:51  102do  3:644  102d2
o þ
5:303  103d3
o  2:492  104d4
o ([49] based on Gunn and Kinzer,
1979) was plotted over the experimental data points and provided
a good representation of the deformation levels of drops formed as
a result of a blunt force impact. In other words, the deformational
response of an impact drop was concordant with that of a falling
drop under steady aerodynamic loading at terminal velocity. The
behavior of drops at terminal velocity was shown earlier to be
accurately predicted by all three deformation models employed,
with the best ﬁt provided by the TAB model.
About seven vibrational and eight bag-type secondary drop
breakup cases were observed for the impact spatter (Fig. 16). The
breakup was possible due to the presence of relatively big spatter
blood drops (1–1.5 mm) which, upon formation, possessed high
velocities and thus Weber numbers (11–15) larger than the critical
Weber number (8–12) for drop breakup commencement ([1]; [26];
[23]). Most of the breakup cases occurred close to the impact point,
within the ﬁrst 10–20 cm of the spatter ﬂight.
The drops were initially observed to deform into ‘liquid disks’
with aspect ratios of 0.3–0.4.
The latter was in good agreement with the critical deformation
level for drop breakup of y  1 (or AR  0.35) postulated in the TAB
model.
The maximum cross-sectional drop diameter (dmax) predicted
by the [23] model was mostly within 5% of that measured
experimentally (see Table 4). Drops no. 2 and 8, however,
possessed slightly asymmetrical distortion which affected size
and aspect ratio measurements and resulted in the discrepancy
between experimental and numerical dmax (by about 13%) and
discussed latter breakup time tbup.
After the maximum drop deformation was reached, drops
further deformed into a bag- or dumbbell-like shaped depending
on the mode of breakup. The drops then disintegrated into smaller
or child droplets. The vibrational drop breakup in the majority of
cases resulted in the parent drop dividing into two approximately
equally sized child drops, whereas bag disintegration produced a
number of different sized droplets. Pilch and Erdman’s [1]
Fig. 16. Examples of vibrational (a) and bag (b) impact blood drop breakup (drop movement is from left to right).
Table 4
Empirical and numerical blood drop bag breakup time tbup and maximum cross-stream diameter dmax comparison.
# 
d, mm 
V, m/s 
We 
Empirical
dmax, mm
dmax (Hsiang
and Faeth,
1992), mm
Empirical
tbup, ms
tbup [1], ms 
tbup [29], ms 
tbup [34], ms
1 
1.16 
25.44 
14.4 
1.99 
1.98 
6.4 
6.4 
3.6 
5.1
2 
1.02 
27.58 
15.1 
1.57 
1.78 
4.8 
4.9 
3 
4.2
3 
1.10 
30.28 
19.6 
2.13 
2.02 
3.9 
3.9 
3.1 
4.4
4 
1.15 
29.66 
19.6 
2.12 
2.12 
4.2 
4.1 
3.4 
4.8
5* 
1.75 
24.08 
19.6 
3.49 
3.38 
7.3 
7.7 
6.3 
9.0
6 
1.59 
27.27 
21.6 
3.02 
3.01 
6.1 
6.2 
5.4 
7.7
7 
1.45 
28.38 
22.6 
2.81 
2.75 
4.4 
4.9 
4.6 
6.6
8* 
2.20 
25.85 
28.4 
3.87 
4.41 
10.2 
12.4 
8.4 
12.2
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
118


--- PAGE 13 ---

expression approximated the breakup time within about 10% of
the experimental values, whereas [29], Reitz and Diwakar’s [34]
expressions predicted either lower or higher breakup time by as
much as about 25%.
8. Conclusions
A numerical code for accurate modeling of blood drop ﬂight was
developed. Gravitational and aerodynamic drag forces as well as
in-ﬂight drop deformation, oscillations and possible secondary
break-up were incorporated.
The validity of the code when predicting passive blood drops
ﬂight with velocity close to terminal was investigated by
comparing numerical predictions and experimental data on blood
drops falling from up to 8 m. All the models for drop deformation
during ﬂight performed well when predicting drop deformation
levels and, consequently, drop fall velocity. Numerical velocities
were within 5% of the mean of the experimental data. It was found
that the deformation effects on passive blood drop trajectory may
be neglected for fall distances less than 1–1.5 m which is
characteristic for typical crime scene conditions.
Typical 
passive 
blood 
drops 
with 
diameters 
of
1 mm < d < 6 mm on early stages of ﬂight (falling up to 1.5 m)
were also experimentally and numerically studied. The simulation
of the initial drop oscillation based on the TAB model provided
accurate prediction of the passive drop behavior. The relative error
in drop aspect ratio values predicted numerically to that observed
experimentally was within 1.6%. Variations in the blood surface
tension and density in the range of the instrumental errors had
negligible effect on the numerical passive drop oscillations and
trajectories. A blood viscosity of 10 mN s/m2 (for the low shear rate
of 10 s1) provided the most satisfactory data ﬁt and was
recommended for passive blood drop oscillations modeling.
It was also suggested that the effects of drop initial oscillation
and distortion from sphericity on its ﬂight characteristics are
negligibly small, and a passive blood drop can be accurately
represented by an initially undisturbed non-oscillating drop
undergoing deformation during ﬂight for all problems other than
the initial drop shape oscillation modeling.
The Weber numbers of the cast-off drops studied did not exceed
3 indicating low deformation levels present and high unlikelihood
of drop disintegration which is unlikely to alter their ﬂight path
and/or velocity at the moment of impact on a surface and thus the
area (or volume) of origin determination. The developed numerical
model provided an accurate prediction of the observed cast-off
drop trajectories over the length of ﬂight studied.
Future work is, however, required to investigate the possibility
of the formation of larger cast-off drops from real sharp- and blunt-
tip weapons at higher swing velocities and, thus, higher Weber
numbers and deformation levels.
The impact blood drops studied possessed high levels of
deformation (with aspect ratios as low as 0.4) and were observed
to breakup in the vibrational and bag-type modes at Wecrit  12–14
within ﬁrst 10–20 cm of ﬂight.
It was shown that impact drop deformation at the studied
conditions can be accurately described with the correlations for
falling drops. The later were accurately represented by the
developed model. The drop breakup model based on [23] predicted
the critical empirical impact drop deformation levels within 5%.
Pilch and Erdman’s [1] expression for the time of drop breakup was
found to be the most accurate when predicting impact blood drop
breakup.
The deformation levels and breakup possibility and modes of
gunshot spatter drops require additional investigation. The range
of sizes and velocities of the gunshot spatter drops and, thus, high
Weber numbers and deformation is of major interest.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank to the Freshpork NZ Ltd. for supplying
porcine blood for this study. We thank Therese de Castro, Margaret
Dodds, Ken Morison, Milad Soltanipour Lazarjan and Pavlo
Kokhanenko for support and encouragement. We are grateful to
Bart P. Epstein for valuable and pleasant discussions. The technical
stuff of the Mechanical Engineering Workshop and Laboratories
contributed essential advice and inspiration. N.K. was funded by a
University of Canterbury Doctoral Scholarship and E.W. by an ESR
Scholarship.
Appendix A. Numerical representation of the drop distortion
and distortion rate used for the code development
The drop distortion and distortion rate on the next computa-
tional time step n + 1 were calculated based on the distortion yn
and distortion rate (dy/dt)n on the previous time step n as
ynþ1 ¼ WeC þ eDt=tD

ðyn  WeCÞcosvDt þ 1
v
dy
dt
 
n
þ yn  WeC
tD
ÞsinvDt


and
dy
dt
 
nþ1
¼ WeC  ynþ1
tD
þ veDt=tD
(
1
v
dy
dt
 
n
þ yn  WeC
tD
 

cosvDt
 ðyn  WeCÞsinvDt
)
:
The 
drop 
aspect 
ratio 
and 
projected 
area: 
ARnþ1 ¼
ð1  0:5ynþ1Þ
1:5 and Anþ1 ¼ pd2
0=4ð1  0:5ynþ1Þ.
Appendix B. Empirical expressions for the drag coefﬁcient of a
solid sphere and disk
Drag coefﬁcient of a rigid spherical particle [20]:
Cs ph
D
¼ 3
16 þ 24
Re, for Re  0.01;
Cs ph
D
¼ 24
Re ð1 þ 0:3115Reð0:820:05xÞÞ, for 0.01 < Re  20;
Cs ph
D
¼ 24
Re ð1 þ 0:1935Re0:6305Þ, for 20 < Re  260;
Cs ph
D
¼ 10ð1:64351:1242xþ0:1558x2Þ, for 260 < Re  1.5  103;
Cs ph
D
¼ 10ð2:4571þ2:5558x0:9295x2þ0:1049x3Þ, 
for 
1.5  103 < Re 
1.2  104;
Cs ph
D
¼ 10ð1:9181þ0:637x0:0636x2Þ, for 1.2  104 < Re  4.4  104;
Cs ph
D
¼ 10ð4:339þ1:5809x0:1546x2Þ, for 4.4  104 < Re  3.38  105;
Cs ph
D
¼ 29:78  53x, for 3.38  105 < Re  4  105;
Cs ph
D
¼ 0:1x  0:49, for 4  105 < Re  106;
Cs ph
D
¼ 0:19  8104
Re , Re > 106 where x = log10Re.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120 
119


--- PAGE 14 ---

Drag coefﬁcient of a rigid disk perpendicular to the ﬂow [33]:
Cdisk
D
¼ 24
Re, for Re < 1;
Cdisk
D
¼ 10ð0:005070:05161x4þ0:16082x2þ0:01987x20:9735xþ1:39573Þ
with
x = log10Re for 1  Re  2000 and x = log102000 for Re > 2000.
References
[1] M. Pilch, C. Erdman, Use of break-up time data and velocity history data to predict
the maximum size of stable fragments for acceleration-induced break-up of a
liquid drop, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 13 (1987) 741–757.
[2] SWGSTAIN BPA Terminology, 2009. Scientiﬁc Working Group on Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN) website (accessed 25.7.10).
[3] V. Balthazard, R. Piedlievre, H. Desoille, L. DeRobert, Etude des gouttes de sang
projete (Study of projected drops of blood), in: Annual Medecine Legale Criminol
Police Science Toxicology, 22nd Congress of Forensic Medicine, Paris, France,
1939, pp. 265–323.
[4] H.L. MacDonell, L.F. Bialousz, Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human
Blood, 
Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, National Institute of Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice, 1971.
[5] H.L. MacDonell, Bloodstain Patterns 1997, Laboratory of Forensic Science, New
York, 1982.
[6] T.L. Laber, Diameter of a bloodstain as a function of origin: distance fallen, and
volume of a drop, Int. Assoc. Bloodstain Pattern Analysts News 2 (1) (1985) 12–16.
[7] A.Y. Wonder, Blood Dynamics, Academic Press, London, 2001.
[8] L. Hulse-Smith, N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, Deducing drop size and impact
velocity from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci. 50 (1) (2005) 1–10.
[9] H.L. MacDonell, K. DeLige, On Measuring the Volume of very small Drops of Blood
and Correlation of this Relationship to Bloodstain Diameter, International Asso-
ciation of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, 1989.
[10] P.L. Kirk, Afﬁdavit Regarding State of Ohio V. Samual Sheppard, Court of Common
Pleas, Criminal Branch, No. 64571, 1955, April 26.
[11] T.R. Bevel, M. Gardner, Bloodstain pattern analysis with an introduction to crime
scene reconstruction, in: Practical Aspects of Criminal & Forensic Investigations,
3rd ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2008.
[12] N. Behrooz, Bloodstain Pattern Analysis of Determination of Point of Origin, (BSc
dissertation), 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University
of Toronto, 2009.
[13] K.G. de Bruin, R.D. Stoel, J.C.M. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin determi-
nation in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (2011) 1476–1782.
[14] J.K. Wells, Investigation of Factors Affecting the Region of Origin Estimate in
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, (MSc dissertation), 
Mechanical Engineering De-
partment, University of Canterbury, 2006.
[15] E.J. Podworny, A.L. Carter, Computer modelling of the trajectories of blood
droplets and bloodstain pattern analysis with a PC computer, in: 2nd Training
Conference in International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, 1989.
[16] U. Buck, B. Kneubuehl, S. Nather, N. Albertini, L. Shmidt, M. Thali, 3D bloodstain
pattern analysis: ballistic reconstruction of the trajectories of blood drops and
determination of the centres of origin of the bloodstains, Forensic Sci. Int. 6114
(2010) 1–7.
[17] U. Buck, B. Kneubuehl, Response to 3D bloodstain pattern analysis: ballistic
reconstruction of the trajectories of blood drops and determination of the centres
of origin of the bloodstains, Forensic Sci. Int. 220 (2012) 41.
[18] M.A. Raymond, E.R. Smith, J. Liesegang, Oscillating blood droplets – implications
for crime scene reconstruction, Sci. Justice 36 (1996) 161–171.
[19] R.M. Gardner, Deﬁning the diameter of the smallest parent-stain produced by a
drip, J. Forensic Ident. 56 (2) (2006) 210–221.
[20] R. Clift, J.R. Grace, M.E. Weber, Bubbles Drops and Particles, Academic Press, 1978.
[21] G. Luxford, Experimental and Modelling Investigation of the Deformation, Drag
and Break-up of Drizzle Droplets Subjected to Strong Aerodynamic Forces in
Relation to SLD Aircraft Icing, (PhD Thesis), 
Cranﬁeld University, 2005.
[22] S.A. Krzeczkowski, Measurement of liquid droplet disintegration mechanisms,
Int. J. Multiphase Flow 6 (1980) 227–239.
[23] L.-P. Hsiang, G.M. Faeth, Drop deformaion and breakup due to shock wave and
steady disturbances, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 21 (1995) 545–560.
[24] M.C. Jermy, M.C. Taylor, The mechanics of bloodstain pattern formation, in: J.
Kieser, M.C. Taylor, D. Carr (Eds.), Forensic Biomechanics (Developments in
Forensic Science), Wiley, 2013, pp. 99–136 (Chapter 5) ISBN 9781119990116.
[25] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics in
bloodstain pattern analysis: comparative review and research opportunities,
Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (2013) 375–396.
[26] A. Wierzba, Deformation breakup of liquid drops in a gas stream at nearly critical
Weber numbers, Exp. Fluids 9 (1990) 59–64.
[27] R. Gunn, G.D. Kinzer, The terminal velocity of fall for water droplet in stagnant air,
J. Meterol. 54 (1949) 243–248.
[28] A.W. Green, An approximation for the shape of large raindrops, J. Clim. Appl.
Meteorol. 14 (1975) 1578–1583.
[29] P.J. O’Rourke, A.A. Amsden, The TAB Method for Numerical Calculation of Spray
Droplet Breakup. SAE Technical Paper 872089, 1987.
[30] A.B. Liu, D. Mather, R.D. Reitz, Modeling the Effects of Drop Drag and Breakup on
Fuel Sprays. SAE Technical Paper 930072, SAE, 1993.
[31] A. Haider, O. Levenspiel, Drag coefﬁcient and terminal velocity of spherical and
nonspherical particles, Powder Technol. 58 (1989) 63–70.
[32] R. Schmehl, Advanced modeling of droplet deformation and breakup for CFD
analysis of mixture preparation, in: 18th Annual Conference on Liquid Atomiza-
tion and Spray Systems, ILASS 2002, 2002, 1–10.
[33] B.S. Massey, Mechanics of Fluids, 6th ed., Chapman Hall, 1989.
[34] R.D. Reitz, R. Diwakar, Structure of high-pressure fuel sprays, society of automo-
tive engineers technical paper 870598, SAE Trans. 96 (5) (1987) 492–509.
[35] S. Casson, G. Kurland, Viscometry of human blood for shear rates of 0–
100,000 s1, Nature 206 (1965) 617–618.
[36] G.D.O. Lowe, J.C. Barbenel, in: G.D.O. Lowe (Ed.), Plasma and Blood Viscosity.
Clinical Blood Rheology, vol. 1, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1988, pp. 11–44.
[37] J. Rosina, E. Kvasˇnˇa´k, D. Sˇuta, H. Kola´rˇova´, J. Ma´lek, L. Krajcˇi, Temperature
dependence of blood surface tension, Physiol. Res. 56 (1) (2007) S93–S98.
[38] E. Williams, M.C. Taylor, The development and construction of a motorized blood
droplet generation device (BDGD) for detailed analysis of blood droplet dynamics,
J. Bloodstain Pattern Anal. 29 (1) (2013).
[39] D. Blair, E. Dufresne, The Matlab Particle Tracking Code Repository, from http://
physics.georgetown.edu/matlab/ (accessed November 2012).
[40] J.C. Crocker, D. Grier, E.R. Weeks, Particle Tracking Using IDL from http://
www.physics.emory.edu/weeks/idl/ (accessed November 2012).
[41] H.R. Pruppacher, R.L. Pitter, A semi-empirical determination of the shape of cloud
and rain drops, J. Atmos. Sci. 28 (1971) 86–94.
[42] F.Y. Testik, A.P. Barros, L.F. Bliven, Field observations of multimode raindrop
oscillations by high-speed imaging, Am. Meteorol. Soc. 63 (2006) 2663–2668.
[43] S. Chandrasekhar, The oscillations of a viscous liquid globe, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.
9 (1959) 141.
[44] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics, Cambridge University Press, 1932.
[45] E. Becker, W.J. Hiller, T.A. Kowalewski, Experimental and theoretical investigation
of large amplitude oscillations of liquid droplets, J. Fluid Mech. 231 (1991) 189–
210.
[46] J. Tsamopoulos, R.A. Brown, Non-linear oscillations of inviscid drops and bubbles,
J. Fluid Mech. 127 (1983) 519–537.
[47] O.A. Basaran, Nonlinear oscillations of viscous liquid drops, J. Fluid Mech. 241
(1992) 169.
[48] L. Rayleigh, On the instability of cylindrical ﬂuid surfaces, Philos. Mag. 34 (207)
(1892) 177–180.
[49] E. Brandes, G. Zhang, J. Vivekanandan, Experiments in rainfall estimation with a
polarimetric radar in a subtropical environment, J. Clim. Appl. Meteorol. 41 (2002)
674–685.
[50] K.V. Beard, C. Chuang, A new model for the equilibrium shape of raindrops, J.
Atmos. Sci. 44 (1987) 1509–1524.
[51] A.C. Best, Empirical formulae for the terminal velocity of water drops falling
through the atmosphere, Quart. J. Meteor. Soc. 76 (1950) 302–311.
[52] E.E. Gossard, R.G. Stauch, D.C. Welsh, S.Y. Matrosov, Cloud layer particle identiﬁ-
cation, and rain rate proﬁles from Z. RV measurements by Doppler radars, J.
Atmos. Ocean. Technol. 9 (1992) 108–119.
[53] M. Thurai, V.N. Bringi, Drop axis ratios from a 2D-video disdrometer, J. Atmos.
Ocean. Technol. 22 (2005) 963–975.
[54] W.G. Uplinger, A new formula for raindrop terminal velocity. Preprints 20th Radar
Metheorology Conference, Am. Meteorol. Soc. Boston (1977) 389–391.
[55] N. Kabaliuk, M.C. Jermy, K. Morison, T. Stotesbury, M.C. Taylor, E. Williams, Blood
drop size in passive dripping from weapons, Forensic Sci. Int. 228 (2013) 75–82.
[56] L. Hulse-Smith, M. Illes, A blind trial evaluation of a crime scene methodology for
deducting impact velocity and droplet size from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic
Sci. 52 (1) (2007) 65–69.
[57] M.J. Sweet, Velocity measurements of projected bloodstains from a medium
velocity impact source, J. Canadian Soc. Forensic Sci. 26 (3) (1993) 103–110.
[58] M.C. Taylor, T.L. Laber, B.P. Epstein, D.S. Zamzow, D.P. Baldwin, The effect of
ﬁrearm muzzle gases on the backspatter of blood, Int. J. Legal Med. 125 (5) (2011)
617–628.
[59] J.H. van Boxel, Numerical model for the fall speed of raindrops in a rainfall
simulator, in: Workshop on Wind and Water Erosion, Ghent, Belgium, November
17–18, (1997), pp. 77–85.
[60] E.E. Michaelides, Particles, Bubbles and Drops – Their Motion, Heat and Mass
Transfer, World Scientiﬁc Publishers, New Jersey, 2006.
[61] L. Liang, E.E. Michaelides, The magnitude of Basset forces in unsteady multiphase
ﬂow computations, J. Fluids Eng. 114 (1992) 417–419.
[62] N. Kabaliuk, Dynamics of Blood Drop Formation and Flight, 
(PhD Thesis),
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2014.
[63] E.S. Ross, The study of bloodstain patterns resulting from the release of blood
drops from a weapon, in Chemistry, The University of Auckland, Auckland, 2006.
N. Kabaliuk et al. / Forensic Science International 245 (2014) 107–120
120
