

--- PAGE 1 ---

Surface coatings including ﬁngerprint residues can signiﬁcantly alter
the size and shape of bloodstains
Samira Shiria, Kenneth F. Martinb, James C. Birda,*
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
b Biomedical Forensic Sciences, Graduate Medical Sciences, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 8 June 2018
Received in revised form 6 November 2018
Accepted 10 December 2018
Available online 19 December 2018
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Surface coating
Human blood drop impact
Drying
Terminal velocity
Clotting
A B S T R A C T
When conducting a blood pattern analysis (BPA) the size, shape, distribution, and location of bloodstains
found at a crime scene may be critical in forming a hypothesis as to what transpired during a bloody
event. Prior studies have demonstrated that the size and shape of a bloodstain on a smooth surface are
determined from impact dynamics and to a lesser degree by the target material itself. Yet, these studies
have relied on clean surfaces, and it is unclear whether the presence of microscopic coatings and residues
could signiﬁcantly alter the size or shape of the dried stain. Here, in the present work, experiments are
conducted to demonstrate that various coatings, such as the sebaceous residue from a latent ﬁngerprint,
can dramatically alter the size and shape of the stain from the moment of impact through the drying
process. These experiments also highlight that a drop impacting a tilted superhydrophobic-coating glass
substrate can cause the blood drop to completely recoil without leaving a stain. Relying on a combination
of high-speed and time-lapse photography, the speciﬁc stages in the stain evolution responsible for the
deviations from the current models are identiﬁed. At a relatively low impact velocity, the stain sizes on
the coated glass surfaces were 35–72% smaller than on the clean glass surface. At a higher impact velocity,
the stains on the coated surfaces were not only smaller, but also contained drop spatter around the
primary stain that was not observable in the absence of the microscopic coatings. The reduction in
bloodstain size did not appreciably change when a chemical was added to deactivate the anticoagulant
and allow the blood to clot.
© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
For over a century, blood pattern analysis (BPA) has been used
by forensic scientists with the intention of reconstructing crime
scenes [1–8] using the evidence in court to either provide missing
details or to challenge or support a witness's testimony. In
situations where blood spatter is present, the size of blood stains
are often associated with the force involved, whereas the shape
and location of the stains can provide insight into an approximate
area of origin [9]. Here detectives use a stringing technique to ﬁnd a
region of origin by assuming blood drops follow straight lines [10],
an assumption that can overestimate the height by tens of
centimeters [11,8]. Within the last decade, methods have been
developed to back out the in-ﬂight parabolic trajectories of the
drops that account for gravitational and drag effects [12]. To apply
these methods, accurate estimate for the initial drop size and
impact velocity are required.
Numerous studies have been carried out to relate the drop
size 
and 
impact 
velocity 
to 
the 
ﬁnal 
size 
and 
shape 
of
bloodstain [13–17]. 
These 
studies 
typically 
relate 
impact
conditions with the number of spines radiating from the dried
drop [13] or—in the absence of spines—with the stain size
itself [15]. These relations appear to depend predominantly on
the impact conditions [16], with some corrections based on the
target properties [14,17]. Thus, under the same impact conditions,
the bloodstain size might differ if the target were glass as opposed
to polycarbonate. It is noteworthy that in almost all experiments
investigating bloodstains, the target is cleaned before impact.
However, at a crime scene, a surface may have unknown coatings
or contaminants which may be invisible to the eye. For example, a
window pane may be coated with ﬁngerprints, a kitchen counter
with a microscopic layer of oil, or a storefront with commercially-
available, superhydrophobic, anti-grafﬁti paint [18]. Here, a natural
question 
arises: 
can 
the 
presence 
of 
microscopic 
coatings
fundamentally alter the size or shape of the dried stain?
This study investigates the effect of microscopic coatings on the
ﬁnal bloodstain size and shape from the vertical impact of a single
drop of human blood. Coatings used here include natural
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jbird@bu.edu (J.C. Bird).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.12.008
0379-0738/© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locat e/f orsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

secretions deposited as ﬁngerprints, vegetable oil, and a super-
hydrophobic coating. Experiments were conducted at impact
velocities both below and above values when splashing might be
expected to occur. The study also explored the inﬂuence of clotting
in the ﬁnal stain formation. In all experiments, high-speed and
time-lapse photography were combined to document the inﬂu-
ence of the coatings from the ﬁrst milliseconds of impact to the
ﬁnal hours of drying. The experimental ﬁndings are contrasted
with existing models to highlight that caution should be used
when conducting bloodstain pattern analysis on surfaces that
might be coated or contaminated.
2. Material and methods
To test effect of microscopic coatings on a bloodstain size and
shape, systematic experiments were conducted in a laboratory
environment. In these experiments, different coatings were
prepared on glass slides as outlined in Section 2.1. Drops of blood
impacted each of these surfaces. Section 2.2 reports the physical
properties of the human blood used in the experiments. The blood
contained anticoagulants to prevent clotting between experi-
ments. To see inﬂuence of clotting on the bloodstain pattern, in
some experiments the anticoagulant was deactivated following
the protocol outlined in Section 2.3.
The drop impact setup and procedure are described in
Section 2.4. In each experiment, a single human blood drop was
released onto one of the prepared glass slides from a ﬁxed height to
set the impact velocity. By imaging the drop with both high-speed
and time-lapse photography, the drop dynamics leading to the
ﬁnal stain were measured and quantiﬁed.
2.1. Surface preparation
Five different sets of surfaces were used in this study, all
starting with cleaned glass slides (VWR1 Plain Micro Slides). The
ﬁrst set of glass slides was cleaned and left uncoated to be used as a
control. To ensure there were no pre-existing oils or organic
residues, a three-solvent method was used. In this method, the
glass slide was ﬁrst rinsed with acetone, then with isopropanol,
and ﬁnally with methanol, after which it was dried with
pressurized air. These slides are referred to as ‘clean’.
The second set of glass slides was coated with the natural
secretions from a ﬁngerprint by a ﬁnger tapping across the slide.
The commission of a crime can present an extremely stressful
situation for many individuals, resulting in excessive sweating [19].
This situation may lead a suspect to deposit enough secretions to
form a comprehensive surface coating with minimal contact. The
coated surfaces were viewed under oblique lighting to conﬁrm the
residue was present.
The third set of surfaces were partially coated with ﬁngerprint
residue to create a binary surface, referred henceforth as a ‘half
clean–half ﬁngerprint’ coating. To prepare this coating, a glass slide
is ﬁrst cleaned with solvents. Half of the slide is then covered with
Scotch tape to serve as a mask and the edge of the tape is identiﬁed
on the reverse side of the slide with permanent ink. Natural
secretions that form ﬁngerprints are deposited onto the masked
slide by repeatedly tapping a ﬁnger along the surface. When the
tape is subsequently removed, there is a sharp boundary between
the portion of the glass that has been exposed to ﬁngerprint
secretion and the portion that has not. The tape does not appear to
leave a residue when it is removed from the glass; indeed this clean
removal has been documented in the microdevice fabrication
literature [20].
The forth set of glass slides was coated with vegetable oil. To
create a thin uniform coating, 50 mL of vegetable oil was deposited
on a clean glass slide with a micropipette. A second clean glass slide
was placed over the oil, and the slides were translated relative to one
another to promote a uniform coverage of the oil. When the slide
were separated, conservation of mass suggests that both were slides
were coated with a 5–10mm-thick layer of vegetable oil.
The ﬁfth set of target substrates consisted of a commercially-
available superhydrophobic coating (Ultra-Ever Dry1) applied to
glass slides. By deﬁnition, superhydrophobic surfaces combine
chemical hydrophobicity with micro/nano-textured roughness.
This roughness can trap air to create a surface that is so
hydrophobic that impacting water drops contact the surface and
rapidly bounce off [21,22]. Both a bottom and top coat were applied
on to cleaned glass slides, and once fully dried, water drops were
placed on the surface to ensure the coating was superhydrophobic.
2.2. Human blood characterization
Many recent blood impact studies have relied on swine
blood [13,7,17]. However when drawing inferences to bloodstains
in crime scenes, using human blood is preferable [23,24]. In the
current experiments, whole human blood is drawn and certiﬁed by
a third-party company (Lampire Biological Laboratories) with a
standard sodium citrate anticoagulant. All experiments and
measurements were performed within one week of the blood
being drawn, and no signs of degradation were apparent.
The fresh human blood was stored in a refrigerator at 5 C. Prior
to conducting each set of experiments, the blood was placed in a
water bath set at 37 C to approximate human body temperature
and stirred with a vortex mixer to ensure a uniform blood cell
suspension.
Existing models for the impact dynamics of blood depend on
the blood viscosity m, density r, and surface tension g and
therefore representative values of these parameters needed to
acquired [14,25]. The viscosity of blood depends on its tempera-
ture, as well as the volume fraction of red blood cells, often referred
to as the hematocrit [26,27]. For the blood in this study, the
hematocrit was approximately 47%, determined by directly
measuring the blood cell sediments and comparing it to the total
volume of blood. The viscosity of this blood at 37 C was measured
to be m = 4.2 mPa s. This representative measurement was obtained
with a vibrational viscometer oscillating at a constant frequency of
30 Hz and amplitude of less than 1 mm. Although it is known that
blood is a shear-thinning liquid, bloodstain experiments and
models have indicated that accounting for this complex ﬂuid
behavior is generally unnecessary [17,24]. The role of temperature
on blood viscosity has been documented [28]. For completeness,
the blood viscosity is the current study is measured over a range of
temperatures and plotted in Fig. 1a. Here the conﬁdence at each
temperature is indicated with a standard deviation s above and
below the mean. The other measured properties for the blood used
in the experiments are tabulated in Fig. 1b. To ﬁnd the density of
the blood, blood samples were weighed at known volumes,
resulting in a measured density of r = 1021 8 kg m3. The surface
tension of the blood was measured to be g = 61.1 0.9 mN m1
using a standard pendant drop method [29].
Another potentially important material property is the contact
angle u between the blood and the surface. For the oil-coated glass,
the contact angle between the blood, oil, and air can be calculated
precisely with Young's equation [30] since both the surface tension
of the blood in air and the surface tension of oil in air can be
measured independently. For the other coatings, the less precise,
but reasonably accurate, sessile drop method is used [31].
2.3. Enabling blood to clot
Most of the experiments carried out in this study were
conducted with the blood sample unaltered. However because
190 
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198


--- PAGE 3 ---

this blood contains anticoagulant, the blood does not clot as it
spreads 
and 
dries 
on 
the 
surface. 
To 
evaluate 
if 
clotting
signiﬁcantly effects bloodstain patterns on the tested coatings,
experiments were also conducted with the anticoagulant deacti-
vated. There are several possible chemicals that will act as an
anticoagulant. In the current experiments, human blood with a
sodium citrate anticoagulant was chosen, as it can be deactivated
by adding a 1:59 ratio of 0.5 molar calcium chloride solution [32].
The material properties of this mixture are not expected to vary
signiﬁcantly from the properties of the blood itself. Measurements
from pendent drop experiments indicate that the surface tension
decreases to g = 60.7  0.9 mN m1, a volume fraction calculation
suggests that the density decreases to r = 1020  8 kg m3, and
from Grunberg–Nissan mixing rule [33], the mixture viscosity is
estimated to decrease to m = 4.1 mPa s.
2.4. Blood impact experiments
To explore the inﬂuence of the surface coatings on the ﬁnal
bloodstains, a series of drop impact experiments are carried out
(Fig. 2). After the human blood was resuspended and warmed, it
was placed into a syringe located at a height h above the prepared
surface. The radius of the released drop was selected to be either
R = 1.0  0.1 mm or R = 2.0  0.1 mm. This size was controlled with
the diameter of the syringe needle, and because any dried blood on
the needle might alter the drop size, a new needle was used before
each experiment. Upon detaching from the needle, the drop would
fall onto the target surface, accelerating under the inﬂuence of
gravity. Impact velocity adjustments U were made by changing the
height h at which drops were released.
The impact dynamics from a side perspective were captured
with a high-speed camera (Photron SA-5) ﬁlming at 10 000 frames
per second. From these images, the size R and velocity U could be
calculated for each individual blood drop at the moment of impact.
A second high-speed camera (Photron SA-X2) was synchronized to
take simultaneous images from a top-down perspective (Fig. 2).
The combination of vantage points allowed for a more complete
measurement of the droplet shape as it impacted and spread along
the surface, including measurements of processes that might break
symmetry. Within a minute after impact, the sample was carefully
moved to a back-lit platform, and images were captured every
minute for three hours with a Nikon DSLR camera (Fig. 2).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Bloodstains on clean glass
The results from the experiments on the clean glass are
presented and discussed ﬁrst, as bloodstains on these surfaces
have been studied in the past [9] and can provide a baseline from
which to evaluate the other surfaces. Blood drops of two sizes
(R = 1 mm and 2 mm) were released from four heights: h = 10 cm,
20 cm, 100 cm, and 200 cm. The measured impact velocity ranged
from U = 1.5 m s1 to 6.1 m s1, consistent with gravitational
acceleration resisted by air drag (Fig. 3a). Note that even when
released from 200 cm, the drops are expected to be below their
terminal velocity Ut when they impact the substrate. Terminal
velocity can be estimated by balancing the weight of the drop and
the drag force with the coefﬁcient of drag approximated to be 0.47
(black lines on left-side of Fig. 3a). These terminal velocities are
similar to what has been measured for rain drops [34].
Fig. 3b shows images of the blood stains that result from these
blood drops after they impact and dry on the glass surface. Each
bloodstain is circular with a ﬁnal size rf that depend on the initial
size R and release height h. More generally, the ﬁnal stain size on a
given surface is considered to depend on the initial drop diameter
2R, impact velocity U, density r, viscosity m, and surface tension g.
Through dimensional analysis, the parameter space can be reduced
such that the spreading factor β = rf/R depends only on two
variables, the Reynolds number, Re  rU(2R)/m and the Weber
number We  r(2R)U2/g.
The results in Fig. 3b are consistent with several existing
models, two of which are directly compared (Fig. 3c). The ﬁrst
expression [15] is based on an energy balance and predicts that for
horizontal surfaces
rf
R ¼ b ¼
We þ 12
3ð1  
cos 
uÞ þ 4We Re1=2
  
!1=2
; 
ð1Þ
where u is the equilibrium contact angle. Another expression [16]
is written in terms of a Padé approximant, an approximation that is
written in terms of a ratio of two power series. These series are
advantageous in that they typically converge rapidly relative to
other standard approximations, and therefore can be more
Fig.1. The properties of the Human blood used in the experiments. (a) The dynamic
viscosity m of 
the blood decreases with temperature. Repeated viscosity
measurements for the sample, which had a hematocrit of 47%, were taken to
calculate a standard deviation s (shaded region). (b) A table illustrates the values of
the blood density r, surface tension g, and contact angles u on the various surfaces.
Fig. 2. Experimental setup. A blood drop of radius R is released from a syringe at
height h above the target substrate. The dynamics were ﬁlmed simultaneously with
two high-speed cameras at different vantage points. After impact, the sample was
moved to a back-lit stand and was photographed every minute as it dried. In
addition to the substrate coating, the size of drop R and release height h were varied
between experiments.
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198 
191


--- PAGE 4 ---

accurate for a given number of terms. This approximation suggests
that the extent that blood drop spreads follows:
rf
R ¼
We1=2
1:24 þ We1=2 Re1=5 : 
ð2Þ
To compare the current experimental results with these
previous model predictions, the Reynolds and Weber numbers
were calculated using the impact velocity and drop size observed
with high-speed camera along with the measured liquid properties
(Section 2.2). Fig. 3c shows the predictions from the ﬁrst model,
Eq. (1), plotted with blue diamonds. The measured spreading factor
corresponds to the horizontal axis and the predicted value
corresponds to the right vertical axis. Similarly, the predictions
from the second model, Eq. (2), are plotted with red squares so that
the predicted values correspond to the left vertical axis. If the
predicted measurements were the same as what was observed,
these points would fall on the black line. Fig. 3c demonstrates that
although these models are not identical, both predict the observed
spreading factor within 10% of the clean glass experimental
measurements.
3.2. Low impact bloodstains on microscopic coatings and residues
We next explore the bloodstains on all ﬁve surfaces in low
impact conditions. The images taken one hour after impact show
that when bloodstains formed on the various coatings they were
remarkably different from those that formed on the clean glass
(Fig. 4). A dotted circle with the size of the clean glass stain had
been added to each image to highlight this difference. In these
images, drops with 1-mm radius were released from h = 20 cm and
drops with 2-mm radius were released from h = 10 cm. Because the
impact velocity scales as U / h1/2, doubling the height for the
smaller drops leads to a similar Weber number for both drop sizes
in the experiments, here approximately We = 160.
There are a few noteworthy features in these stains. Not only do
the ﬁngerprint and oil coatings lead to smaller bloodstains, but
these stains are irregular and fragile. In particular, they more easily
delaminate and fracture during drying. For the case of the half
clean-half ﬁngerprint coated glass, the bloodstain captures the
asymmetry of the surface coating. On the clean half, the drop dries
with the same shape and size as if it were on a fully clean surface.
Whereas on the coated half, the bloodstain is more compact and
shares similarities with those on the surfaces fully coated by oil and
ﬁngerprint residues. For the case of superhydrophobic coating,
when the surface was ﬂat, the blood dries as a beaded up drop,
whereas when the surface was tilted by a small amount (7), even
less volume is left behind. Finally, a keen observer will note that a
ring stain surrounds the principal stain for the larger drop on the
ﬁngerprint coated glass (Fig. 4, 2nd from left, bottom row). This
ring is reminiscent of a coffee stain [35] and suggests that the
contact line may have been temporarily stuck or pinned at that
position as it dried.
Additional insight into how these ﬁnal stains developed can be
gained by evaluating images of the stains taken at both the
millisecond and minute timescale. Fig. 5 shows a series of high-
speed images taken at the time of impact for the larger drops that
developed the stains in Fig. 4 (bottom row). Each column
corresponds to a particular time t measured in millisecond relative
to the time of impact (t = 0). Each row corresponds to a different
surface with either a top-view perspective (Fig. 5a) or side-view
perspective (Fig. 5b). The images show that the drops are spherical
with a radius of R = 2 0.1 mm as they impact the surfaces at
U = 1.5  0.1 m s1, leading to a Weber number of We  160. The
drops 
rapidly 
spread 
out, 
reaching 
a 
maximum 
radius 
of
approximately rmax = 6 mm in approximately 5 ms. At this point,
the ﬂattened drop is thicker along its perimeter than center. For the
blood drop on the clean glass, the drop stays at this size, but the
thickness proﬁle adjusts so that the thickness decreases from the
center outward.
By contrast, on the ﬁngerprint-coated surface, the drop begins
to retract after reaching a maximum radius (Fig. 5). Indeed, on the
half clean-half ﬁngerprint substrate, the stain retracts only on
the ﬁngerprint-coated portion. A similar retraction is observed on
the oil-coated glass. On the superhydrophobic surface, the
retraction dynamics are so extreme, that the blood drop forms
an upward jet within 25 ms after impact. When the super-
hydrophobic-coated glass is ﬂat, the blood drop adheres to the
surface and the drop returns to the surface intact. However, when
the superhydrophobic surface is slightly tilted, the majority of the
blood drop can bounce off of the impact spot within a fraction of a
second, leaving only a small speck of blood behind (Fig. 5b). To be
clear, these types of spreading and retraction dynamics after
impact are well known for simple liquids, such as water [36,37].
Fig. 3. Comparison of the size of dried human bloodstains on a clean glass surface
with the published predictions. (a) The impact velocity U increases with release
height h and drop size R. Theoretical predictions (curves) for drop sizes of R = 1
(small circles) and 2 mm (large circles) indicate that the drops in the experiments
have not reached terminal velocity Ut. (b) The shape of the dried bloodstain on the
glass surface is circular with a ﬁnal size rf that depends on the initial size R and
release height h. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images. (c) The spreading
factors rf/R = β for the experiments are plotted in terms of the dimensionless groups
of Weber number We, Reynolds number Re, and contact angle u = 15 (measured
value for clean glass) so that they can be directly compared with two published
predictions (black line). Note that the square points correspond to prediction based
on the left axis and the diamond points correspond to prediction based on the
right axis.
192 
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198


--- PAGE 5 ---

Fig. 4. Top-down view of the ﬁnal dried bloodstains on the glass surfaces with the various coatings. Each row corresponds to the same set of impact conditions. The blue
dotted circle was added to indicate the size of the stain relative to that on clean glass. All the glass surfaces were ﬂat, except for the far right images, which were slightly
inclined (7). The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
Fig. 5. High speed images of the initial impact dynamics of the blood drops. (a) A top view perspective illustrates how the contact radius r depends on time t and is affected by
the various surface coatings. (b) Simultaneous images from the side view provide additional perspective. Here R = 2.0  0.1 mm and U = 1.5  0.1 m s1. The scalebar of 5 mm
applies to all images.
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198 
193


--- PAGE 6 ---

What is less clear is their relevance to forensic science and the ﬁnal
conﬁguration of a bloodstain.
To see how the coatings affect the longer-time stain formation,
comparisons are made between the top-view images of the drops
over timescales of minutes to hours (Fig. 6). Overall, the stain sizes
and shapes do not appear to substantially change during the drying
process. An exception occurs on the ﬁngerprint-coated glass, as
there appears to be a stick-slip dynamic between the images taken
at 30 and 60 min. Speciﬁcally, the contact line for this drop
suddenly retracts as the drop dries, leaving behind a faint ring of
dried blood (Fig. 6, second row).
The drying dynamics on the clean glass is similar to what has
been previously documented [38]. Within 10 min of being on the
surface, the drop changes color as it solidiﬁes and appears to form a
thicker rim region. Within 30 min, the drop has completely dried,
and cracks have formed along the rim. On the coated surfaces, the
drop takes longer to completely dry, perhaps because it is thicker,
as indicated by the darker color when backlit (Fig. 6).
Taken together, the short and long-time dynamics indicate
that 
stain 
size 
on 
these 
microscopic 
coatings 
(Fig. 
4) 
is
predominantly set within the ﬁrst tenth of a second. The early-
time spreading and retraction can be quantiﬁed by measuring the
contact radius r over time t. Fig. 7a plots this contact radius,
normalized by the initial drop radius, for the drops illustrated in
Fig. 5. Note that during the spreading phase, the dynamics are
indistinguishable and the differences in the stain size appear to
be related to the speed at which the extended droplet retracts. The
ﬁnal spreading factor β is also included for comparison. The
retraction speed and timescale are consistent with a mechanism in
which the contact lines recede to lower the surface energy while
being resisted by the liquid inertia [39,40]. This mechanism
indicates that the contact angle u of the coating is likely an
important parameter when predicting the ﬁnal stain size. Recall
Fig. 6. Time series of the drying process for the blood drops depicted in Fig. 5. All drops were in their ﬁnal conﬁguration after 2 h. Note that the line visible in the half clean-half
ﬁngerprint binary coating is on the opposite side of the glass slide and used to identify the edge of the coating. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
Fig. 7. Plot of the contact radius r(t) and ﬁnal spreading factor β for the blood
drops depicted in Figs. 5 and 6 . (a) The normalized contact radius r(t)/R spreads to a
maximum value rmax/R ms after impact. Subsequently, the drop can recede and
eventually reaches a ﬁnal spreading factor β. (b) The ﬁnal spreading factor rf/R = β
depends on the measured contact angle u of the coating (closed symbols) and is
plotted along with the prediction from current theories (Eq. (1), blue line and
Eq. (2), red line). The model is in closer agreement with the maximum extent that
the blood spreads (open symbols) than the ﬁnal stain size (closed symbols).
194 
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198


--- PAGE 7 ---

that contact angles between each of the surfaces, blood, and air
were measured and tabulated in Fig. 1b.
The spreading factor β of the blood stain decreased monotoni-
cally with increasing contact angle u for the different microscopic
coatings (Fig. 7b, closed symbols). Although this wettability
measure is often neglected when predicting bloodstain size, it is
included in some models, such as Eq. (1). Yet the inﬂuence of
contact angle in the current results appears much greater than
might be expected from this model. To illustrate this point, results
from the models (the ones that adequately predicted the ﬁnal stain
size for the clean glass slides in Fig. 3c) are plotted alongside the
data in Fig. 7b. Note that these models predict that the drop will
spread out to approximately three times its initial radius for any
contact angle. The bloodstain on the clean glass slide spreads out to
this size, but the other ﬂat coatings result in ﬁnal stain diameters
that are 35–72% smaller.
The primary source of discrepancy between these models and
the current results is likely the tacit assumption that droplet
spreads to a particular size and remains at this size as it dries. In
other words, the ﬁnal bloodstain size rf is identical to its maximum
size rmax. Had this constraint held for the current results and the
ﬁnal stain were the same as the maximum spreading radius, the
spreading factor would have been much closer to the predictions
(Fig. 7b, open symbols). It should be noted that this assumption is
completely appropriate for the clean glass slide, and likely
appropriate for other clean surfaces. Indeed, if this assumption
was not made and the drops were completely free to adopt a ﬁnal
conﬁguration that minimized energy, they would form spherical
caps based on their initial size and contact angle. In this case, the
spreading factor would be completely independent of the impact
conditions and depend only on the surface conditions.
One reason why blood drops might stay at their maximum
spreading size on a clean surface is that the contact line becomes
pinned. It is well known that colloidal particle can jam at a contact
line, preventing it from receding [41,42]. If this is the case, it makes
the authors’ choice of forensically-relevant coatings all the more
noteworthy, as they prevent the blood drop contact line from
pinning, at least initially. A reduction in contact line pinning is also
consistent with a reduction in adhesion between the dried blood and
the coatings. The dried blood on the oil-coated glass can be readily
displaced and can completely detach from the superhydrophobic
surface with a slight external force, such as a gentle breeze. The blood
drops on the ﬁngerprint-coated glass appears to have more
adherence, but still noticeably less than on the clean glass surface.
3.3. High impact bloodstains on microscopic coatings and residues
It is natural to inquire whether the effects of the coatings that
were observed at relatively low impact conditions (Fig. 7) extend to
higher impact conditions as well. In particular, it is noteworthy that
the impact conditions for the larger blood drop (R = 2 mm) released
at h = 100 cm (impacting the surface at U = 4.5  0.2 m s1), are
substantial enough for splashing to be expected [43], yet no clear
evidence of splashing is observed for the stain on the clean glass
surface (Fig. 3b).
Fig. 8 illustrates the ﬁnal bloodstain conﬁgurations when the
drops impact the various surfaces at this higher release height and
directly compares them to the bloodstains released from the lower
height. Here R = 2.0  0.1 mm and higher height leads to an impact
velocity of U = 4.5  0.2 m s1 and Weber number of We  1400. The
presence of the coatings has an even larger effect at this higher
impact speed. The principle stain is smaller on the coated glass
surfaces than on the clean glass and more irregular. Indeed on the
oil-coated and superhydrophobic-coated glass, small droplets
surround the principle stain (denoted with arrows in Fig. 8).
High-speed imaging of initial impact dynamics of these stains
illustrates the drop on the clean surface spreads to a maximum size
and the contact line remains pinned (Fig. 9). By contrast, the contact
lines on the coated surfaces retract to varying degrees, similar to
what was observed for the lower impact conditions. However, unlike
what was observed for the lower impact conditions, the initial
spreading of the high impact drops differs between the different
coatings. In particular, spines and ligaments develop on the oil-
coated and superhydrophobic-coated glass and breakup to form the
tiny surrounding droplets (Fig. 9). On the superhydrophobic surface,
holes nucleate in the center of the ﬁlm as it begins to retract. As these
holes expand, more ligaments are formed, although many of these
recoalesce to form a principle drop.
Over the drying timescale, the drop shapes changes only
slightly, with the exception again being the stain on the
ﬁngerprint-coated glass (Fig. 10). As the drop on the ﬁngerprint-
coated glass dries, the contact line appears to ﬁrst stick and then
slip, creating small ﬂakes of dried blood that are loosely connected
to the surface. The drops appear to fully dry within an hour.
Fractures occur for the drops on the coated surfaces, which may be
due to a combination of them being thicker and less well adhered
to the surface.
The differences in the bloodstain sizes between the low and
high impact conditions for the various coatings offers a way to
Fig. 8. Comparison of bloodstain patterns at lower and higher release heights h for the various coatings. The dried stains can develop highly irregular shapes, and numerous
tiny droplets surround the principle stains on the bottom left two images (highlighted with arrows). Here the initial drop sizes are all the same with radius R = 2.0  0.1 mm
and release heights are h = 10 and h = 100 cm. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198 
195


--- PAGE 8 ---

assess whether the ideas of contact line pinning in the last section
continue to be consistent with the data. With the assumption that
the contact line becomes pinned when the drop reaches its
maximum extent, the higher impact velocity should lead to a larger
stain, as illustrated with bloodstains on the clean glass (Fig. 8, ﬁrst
column). If no contact line pinning occurs, then the stain size
should be independent of the impact velocity. This claim seems
consistent with the size of the bloodstains on the oil-coated glass
(Fig. 8, third column). Interestingly, the size of the stain on the
ﬁngerprint-coated surface increases with the impact velocity, but
is smaller than the clean glass, suggesting a contact line pinning
that is between the two extremes.
3.4. Role of clotting on bloodstains
The ﬁnal section of this study explores whether the bloodstain
conﬁgurations on the various coatings would be signiﬁcantly
modiﬁed if the blood were able to clot. Most laboratory experi-
ments of bloodstains include anticoagulant to keep the blood from
clotting 
between 
experiments; 
however, 
if 
the 
results 
are
Fig. 10. Longer time dynamics of bloodstain drying process for blood drops depicted in Fig. 8. In all coated surfaces not only were the stains smaller than the clean surface, but
drop spatter was observed around the primary stain. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
Fig. 9. High-speed images of the initial impact dynamics for the blood drops illustrated in Fig. 8. The top-view perspective illustrates how the surface coatings modify certain
dynamics, such as crown splashing and spine formation, characteristic of the faster impact velocity. Here R = 2.0  0.1 mm and U = 4.5  0.2 m s1 leading to a Weber number of
We  1400. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
196 
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198


--- PAGE 9 ---

signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the presence of the anticoagulant, they
would be less applicable to a crime scene where bloodstains can
clot. To provide evidence that the results in this manuscript extend
to blood that can clot, the anticoagulant is deactivated following
the procedure outlined in Section 2.3 
and the low impact
experiments are repeated with R = 2 mm and h = 10 cm on the ﬁve
surfaces (Fig. 11).
The ﬁnal dried bloodstains demonstrated that the presence of
these coatings noticeably reduced the size of the bloodstain
relative to the clean glass regardless of whether the blood was able
to clot. Given that the high-speed images indicate that most of the
stain reduction occurs within a fraction of a second upon impact, it
is not particularly surprising that clotting—which typically is
associated with longer time periods—has a negligible effect.
Nevertheless, there are some aspects of the bloodstains that differ
between the activated and deactivated anticoagulant experiments
that warrant closer inspection. In particular, the stain on the
ﬁngerprint-coated glass appeared to undergo a sudden retraction
on the hour time-scale (Fig. 6). One might think that clotting might
prevent the pinned contact line from retracting on this timescale,
and indeed no evidence of a stick-slip condition is observed. Yet the
size of the ﬁnal stain is similar for the two anticoagulant cases
(Fig. 11a, second column), suggesting the possibility that the blood
did not pin on the ﬁnger-coated glass in the ﬁrst place.
The notion that the contact line of the bloodstains with the
deactivated anticoagulant are less likely to pin than with the
activated anticoagulant is supported by additional stain features in
Fig. 11. When the stain fragments, the fragments appear closer
together when clotting can occur. Additionally, the small stain left
on 
the 
tilted 
superhydrophobic 
surface 
vanishes 
with 
the
deactivated anticoagulant. Multiple tests were done to demon-
strate that this effect was repeatable. The high-speed images of the
impact show that this drop completely detaches from the interface
(Fig. 11b), demonstrating that it is possible for a drop of blood to
impact a coated surface without leaving a visible trace.
A 
ﬁnal 
curious 
discrepancy 
between 
the 
activated 
and
deactivated anticoagulant bloodstains is the stain proﬁle and
crack pattern on the clean glass (Fig. 11a, ﬁrst column). For the
human blood with the activated anticoagulant, there is a rim
surrounding the stain that is darker than the interior, suggesting
that it might be thicker. Along this rim, there are regularly-spaced
radial cracks. These crack patterns are similar to those described by
Brutin et al. [38]. In contrast, the human blood with the deactivated
anticoagulant has a rim that is lighter than the interior, suggesting
that it might be thinner. Rather than form cracks at constant angles
from the center, a single crack is observed at a constant radius. This
observation suggests that the anticoagulant may fundamentally
alter the drying process, which could have implications to blood
drying studies beyond forensics. It is important to note, that the
present evidence relies on experiments with blood that has been
previously spiked with anticoagulant, which could potentially
differ from fresh blood. Nevertheless, the presence of clotting itself
does not appear to negate the results from this paper.
4. Conclusions
To investigate the effect of microscopic coatings on a bloodstain
size and shape, systematic drop impact experiments were
conducted using dual-view high-speed imaging and time-lapse
photography. Three nearly invisible coatings were applied to glass
slides: natural secretions of a ﬁngerprint, vegetable oil and a
superhydrophobic coating. In contrast to prior studies in which
surface conditions were essentially immaterial to the staining
process, the results of this study illustrate that the effects of these
speciﬁc coatings on bloodstains can be dramatic. At low impact
velocity, the stain size relative to the clean glass reduced by 35% for
ﬁngerprint coated glass, 49% for oil coated glass, and 72% for ﬂat
superhydrophobic coated glass. When the superhydrophobic
coated glass was tilted slightly, the blood drop could leave the
surface with a minuscule stain (96% reduction) or no stain at all. At
the higher impact velocity, not only was the stain smaller than the
clean surface, but drop spatter was observed around the primary
stain. High-speed imaging revealed that size differences were
largely due to drop receding dynamics within the ﬁrst milliseconds
of impact and suggests that these coatings may have prevented the
stain from pinning to the surface at the point of maximum
spreading. This reduction in contact line pinning appears to allow
the stain to continue shrinking during the drying stage. When the
anticoagulant in the human blood drops was deactivated to allow
for clotting—a process likely to occur in actual crime-scene
Fig. 11. Images illustrating the effect of blood clotting on the ﬁnal stain pattern (a). Regardless of whether the anticoagulant is activated or deactivated, the coatings have a
similar effect on the bloodstains. The conditions are identical to those in Fig. 4 bottom row (here repeated in top row for comparison). Note a few distinct differences that are
repeatable and potentially signiﬁcant—including the complete absence of a stain on the tilted superhydrophobic surface. (b) High-speed images of the blood drop, with the
deactivated anticoagulant, completely bouncing off of the tilted superhydrophobic-coated glass and leaving no stain. The scalebar of 5 mm applies to all images.
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198 
197


--- PAGE 10 ---

situations—the results were similar to those for blood with active
anticoagulant. Since the stain size and shape can be critical in
conducting a bloodstain pattern analysis, our results highlight the
need for forensic analysts to exercise caution when evaluating
bloodstains on surfaces that might contain superhydrophobic
coatings or oil residues, including latent ﬁngerprint residue.
Author contributions
J.C.B. and K.F.M. conceived the research. S.S. designed and
fabricated the experimental setup and carried out the experi-
ments. S.S. and J.C.B. contributed to the development of the theory,
conducted the analyses, and all the authors wrote the manuscript
together.
Acknowledgements
The project was supported by the Boston University Dean's
Catalyst Award. The authors thank Armela Murrizi for assistance in
measuring blood viscosity.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be
found, in the online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.for-
sciint.2018.12.008.
References
[1] P. Comiskey, A. Yarin, D. Attinger, High-speed video analysis of forward and
backward spattered blood droplets, Forensic Sci. Int. 276 (2017) 134–141.
[2] R. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zang, W. Shen, Blood drop patterns: formation and
applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 231 (2016) 1–14.
[3] N.K. Osborne, M.C. Taylor, M. Healey, R. Zajac, Bloodstain pattern classiﬁcation:
accuracy, effect of contextual information and the role of analyst character-
istics, Sci. Justice 56 (2) (2016) 123–128.
[4] U. Buck, B. Kneubuehl, S. Näther, N. Albertini, L. Schmidt, M. Thali, 3D
bloodstain pattern analysis: ballistic reconstruction of the trajectories of blood
drops and determination of the centres of origin of the bloodstains, Forensic
Sci. Int. 206 (1–3) (2011) 22–28.
[5] M. Illes, M. Boué, Robust estimation for area of origin in bloodstain pattern
analysis via directional analysis, Forensic Sci. Int. 226 (1–3) (2013) 223–229.
[6] C.R. Varney, F. Gittes, Locating the source of projectile ﬂuid droplets, Am. J.
Phys. 79 (8) (2011) 838–842.
[7] C. Knock, M. Davison, Predicting the position of the source of blood stains for
angled impacts, J. Forensic Sci. 52 (5) (2007) 1044–1049.
[8] A. Carter, The directional analysis of bloodstain patterns theory and
experimental validation, Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. J. 34 (4) (2001) 173–189.
[9] T. Bevel, R.M. Gardner, Bloodstain pattern analysis with an introduction to
crime scene reconstruction, CRC Press, 2008.
[10] S.H. James, P.E. Kish, T.P. Sutton, Principles of bloodstain pattern analysis:
theory and practice, CRC Press, 2005.
[11] K.G. de Bruin, R.D. Stoel, J. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin
determination in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (6) (2011)
1476–1482.
[12] N. Laan, K.G. De Bruin, D. Slenter, J. Wilhelm, M. Jermy, D. Bonn, Bloodstain
pattern analysis: implementation of a ﬂuid dynamic model for position
determination of victims, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 11461.
[13] L. Hulse-Smith, N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, Deducing drop size and impact
velocity from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci. 50 (1) (2005) JFS2003224-10.
[14] C.D. Adam, Fundamental studies of bloodstain formation and characteristics,
Forensic Sci. Int. 219 (1–3) (2012) 76–87.
[15] C.D. Adam, Experimental and theoretical studies of the spreading of
bloodstains on painted surfaces, Forensic Sci. Int. 229 (1–3) (2013) 66–74.
[16] N. Laan, K.G. de Bruin, D. Bartolo, C. Josserand, D. Bonn, Maximum diameter of
impacting liquid droplets, Phys. Rev. Appl. 2 (4) (2014) 044018.
[17] S. Kim, Y. Ma, P. Agrawal, D. Attinger, How important is it to consider target
properties and hematocrit in bloodstain pattern analysis? Forensic Sci. Int. 266
(2016) 178–184.
[18] M. Lettieri, M. Masieri, Surface characterization and effectiveness evaluation of
anti-grafﬁti coatings on highly porous stone materials, Appl. Surf. Sci. 288
(2014) 466–477.
[19] G.E. Folk, A. Semken, The evolution of sweat glands, Int. J. Biometeorol. 35 (3)
(1991) 180–186.
[20] J.W. Park, B. Vahidi, A.M. Taylor, S.W. Rhee, N.L. Jeon, Microﬂuidic culture
platform for neuroscience research, Nat. Protoc. 1 (4) (2006) 2128.
[21] D. Richard, C. Clanet, D. Quéré, Surface phenomena: contact time of a bouncing
drop, Nature 417 (6891) (2002) 811.
[22] S. Shiri, J.C. Bird, Heat exchange between a bouncing drop and a super-
hydrophobic substrate, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. (2017) 201700197.
[23] C. Willis, A.K. Piranian, J.R. Donaggio, R.J. Barnett, W.F. Rowe, Errors in the
estimation of the distance of fall and angles of impact blood drops, Forensic
Sci. Int. 123 (1) (2001) 1–4.
[24] F. Smith, C. Nicloux, D. Brutin, Inﬂuence of the impact energy on the pattern of
blood drip stains, Phys. Rev. 3 (1) (2018) 013601.
[25] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics
in bloodstain pattern analysis: comparative review and research opportu-
nities, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (1–3) (2013) 375–396.
[26] G.B. Thurston, Viscoelasticity of human blood, Biophys. J. 12 (9) (1972)
1205–1217.
[27] S. Chien, S. Usami, H.M. Taylor, J.L. Lundberg, M.I. Gregersen, Effects of
hematocrit and plasma proteins on human blood rheology at low shear rates, J.
Appl. Physiol. 21 (1) (1966) 81–87.
[28] E. Merrill, E. Gilliland, G. Cokelet, H. Shin, A. Britten, R. Wells Jr., Rheology of
human blood, near and at zero ﬂow: effects of temperature and hematocrit
level, Biophys. J. 3 (3) (1963) 199–213.
[29] J. Andreas, E. Hauser, W. Tucker, Boundary tension by pendant drops, J. Phys.
Chem. 42 (8) (1938) 1001–1019.
[30] T. Young, An essay on the cohesion of ﬂuids, Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. 95 (1805)
65–87.
[31] R.J. Good, M. Koo, The effect of drop size on contact angle, J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 71 (2) (1979) 283–292.
[32] M. Rånby, S. Ramström, P.-O. Svensson, T. Lindahl, Clotting time by free
oscillation rheometry and visual inspection and a viscoelastic description
of the clotting phenomenon, Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest. 63 (6) (2003)
397–406.
[33] L. Grunberg, A.H. Nissan, Mixture law for viscosity, Nature 164 (4175) (1949)
799.
[34] G.B. Foote, P. Du Toit, Terminal velocity of raindrops aloft, J. Appl. Meteorol. 8
(2) (1969) 249–253.
[35] R.D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T.F. Dupont, G. Huber, S.R. Nagel, T.A. Witten, Capillary
ﬂow as the cause of ring stains from dried liquid drops, Nature 389 (6653)
(1997) 827.
[36] A.L. Yarin, Drop impact dynamics: splashing, spreading, receding, bouncing,
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 38 (2006) 159–192.
[37] C. Josserand, S.T. Thoroddsen, Drop impact on a solid surface, Annu. Rev. Fluid
Mech. 48 (2016) 365–391.
[38] D. Brutin, B. Sobac, B. Loquet, J. Sampol, Pattern formation in drying drops of
blood, J. Fluid Mech. 667 (2011) 85–95.
[39] P.-G. De Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart, D. Quéré, Capillarity and gravity,
Capillarity and Wetting Phenomena, Springer, 2004, pp. 33–67.
[40] D. Bartolo, C. Josserand, D. Bonn, Retraction dynamics of aqueous drops upon
impact on non-wetting surfaces, J. Fluid Mech. 545 (2005) 329–338.
[41] R.D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T.F. Dupont, G. Huber, S.R. Nagel, T.A. Witten, Contact
line deposits in an evaporating drop, Phys. Rev. E 62 (1) (2000) 756.
[42] B.M. Weon, J.H. Je, Self-pinning by colloids conﬁned at a contact line, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110 (2) (2013) 028303.
[43] T.C. de Goede, N. Laan, K. de Bruin, D. Bonn, Effect of wetting on drop splashing
of Newtonian ﬂuids and blood, Langmuir 34 (18) (2018) 5163–5168.
198 
S. Shiri et al. / Forensic Science International 295 (2019) 189–198
