

--- PAGE 1 ---

Experimental and theoretical studies into the release of blood droplets
from weapon tips
Craig D. Adam
School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Lennard-Jones Laboratories, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire ST5 5BG, UK
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 4 May 2019
Received in revised form 13 August 2019
Accepted 19 August 2019
Available online 22 August 2019
Keywords:
Forensic
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Blood spatter
Blood droplet
Swing cast-off
Surface tension
A B S T R A C T
The formation and release under gravity of blood droplets from simulated weapon tips has been
investigated experimentally and the results analysed and interpreted using established theoretical
models for detached pendent drops. Droplets were produced from a series of conical nozzles,
manufactured with a range of cone angles and including a set of un-bored conical tips, under conditions
where the tip was either non-wetted or pre-wetted with blood. For the former, radius-limited case,
detached droplet volumes were found to agree well with the predictions of both the pendent drop weight
and drop shape models. For pre-wetted tips, droplet volumes were found to increase with increasing
cone angle and to be independent of whether the blood ﬂow was through an oriﬁce at the tip or across the
tip surface itself for un-bored tips. Such angle-limited, detached droplet volumes were predicted well by
applying the same contact angle correction factor as for a ﬂat surface. The maximum droplet volume,
formed from a horizontal ﬂat surface, was found to be around 150 mL for horse blood. Similar theoretical
approaches were then extended to droplets released under centrifugal force appropriate to swing cast-off
activity and evaluated using previously published experimental data. Order of magnitude agreement for
droplet diameters was fairly good but, more importantly, these were found to be proportional to the
inverse of the tangential velocity thereby supporting a model where the blood droplet is released directly
from a blood mass itself, such as a ligament, rather than from being pinned to some surface feature or
oriﬁce on the weapon. This work provides a sound theoretical and experimental understanding of blood
droplet release under these conditions that can underpin both future research and the interpretation of
blood evidence in case-work.
© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Over recent years there have been many published studies
exploring the science underpinning bloodstain pattern analysis.
Amongst this literature, many of these [1–9] have focused on the
dynamics of blood droplets, surface impact and stain formation,
including impact angle and surface texture effects, whilst others
have investigated 
pattern 
formation 
itself, 
for 
example 
by
analysing droplet trajectories and the methodologies used in
case-work examination and interpretation [10–15]. In contrast,
there are fewer examples where the initial formation of the blood
droplets themselves has been studied, for example on weapon tips,
and speciﬁcally the factors which govern the volume of the droplet
released whether under passive (drip from a static source) or active
(for example, from swing cast-off) conditions [16–18]. Studies of
these factors, for the most part, have focused on experimental
investigations rather than exploration of the theoretical basis for
droplet formation and the veriﬁcation of such mathematical
models against those experimental data.
This present work was designed to ﬁll this gap in the literature
by reviewing and developing current understanding of the
mechanisms underpinning the formation and adhesion of blood
droplets at oriﬁces and on surfaces – the pendent drop – and the
conditions under which droplets are released, either under gravity
alone or under the centrifugal force generated during swing cast-
off. To test and evaluate such a quantitative, theoretical approach, a
series of experiments was carried out to obtain data on the
relationship between the size, shape and properties of the oriﬁce
or surface and the volume of blood droplets formed on passive
release. This was achieved by using bored and un-bored conical
brass tips machined at a variety of angles as models for weapon tips
of differing sharpness. In this study particular attention was paid to
the degree of wetting of the surface by the blood and the
consequent size of the detached droplet. In addition, quantitative
data already published, from model swing cast-off studies [12,16],
has been used in a similar fashion to evaluate mathematical
models for the active release of blood droplets.
E-mail address: c.d.adam@keele.ac.uk (C.D. Adam).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2019.109934
0379-0738/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locat e/f orsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

Although casework applications relate almost exclusively to
human blood, blood droplets and bloodstains, in the research
context other sources of blood are frequently used [1–18]. In
addition to many examples of the use of porcine blood in blood
dynamics studies, more recently, deﬁbrinated horse blood has
been utilised due to its commercial availability. In this present
work, the experimental data and its interpretation are carried out
in the context of horse blood while, in explaining the theoretical
aspects and in discussions, comparison with human blood and,
where appropriate, porcine blood are made.
2. Theory of droplet formation
Although the basic physical principles underpinning the
formation of a pendent drop and its subsequent release are fairly
straightforward, there are several modiﬁcations and reﬁnements
of this theory that are necessary to obtain mathematical models
that fully support experimental ﬁndings. In this section, these
will be reviewed with a view to focusing on those aspects which
are of direct use in providing an understanding of beneﬁt to the
context of forensic blood evidence. A good introduction and
overview of much of the basic ﬂuid dynamics theory is provided
by Middleman [19].
2.1. The balance of forces approach and the drop-weight method
Historically, the need for a detailed understanding of the
pendent drop arose through it being the basis of methods for the
determination of the surface tension of a liquid. Hence, Tate’s Law
was formulated [19] which balances the weight of the pendent
drop against the surface tension force around the interface
between the neck of the liquid and the oriﬁce supplying it. As
the drop grows in size there will be a maximum weight that can be
supported by the ﬁnite surface tension force, at which point the
drop detaches from the oriﬁce. As the size of the droplet detached
in this fashion is determined by the size of the oriﬁce, such droplets
are termed ‘radius-limited’.
It was realised many years ago [20,21] that the volume of the
detached droplet is in fact less than that of the maximum pendent
drop volume since the fracture point occurs across the neck region
of the liquid that forms in the ﬁnal stages before detachment,
rather than at the junction with the oriﬁce itself. Consequently an
empirical correction factor was suggested by Rayleigh [20] which
was later reﬁned by Harkins and Brown [21] to become the
theoretical basis of an acknowledged standard method for surface
tension measurement — the ‘drop-weight method’. Although
originally provided as a curve deﬁned by discrete experimental
data points, there have been several attempts to ﬁt analytical
functions to this correction factor so providing a more convenient
form for the user [22–24]. More recently an equivalent correction
curve has been derived from theoretical considerations and
provided with a simple analytical form [25]. In all these cases
only the lower section of the curve has been studied.
It is important to reﬂect on some of the detailed assumptions
built into this model when wishing to extrapolate it to the wider
range of scenarios appropriate to blood droplet formation. For an
oriﬁce of radius R and a liquid of density r and surface tension g,
we may balance the forces as:
2pRgcosu ¼ rgVp
ð1Þ
Here Vp is the volume of the pendent drop and u is the contact
angle between the liquid surface and the thin wall of the oriﬁce
around the, assumed circular, contact line between liquid and
oriﬁce. The maximum stable drop volume will be found when the
surface tension force is at a maximum. This occurs when the
contact angle is zero which requires the liquid surface to neck from
the pendent drop towards the oriﬁce. Hence, we can write Tate’s
Law as:
Vp ¼ pa2R 
ð2Þ
where a ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2g=rg
p
is deﬁned as the capillary length for the liquid.
Note that this constant is sometimes deﬁned alternatively without
the factor of 2 in the expression. Using appropriate values of g and
r for human blood [6], the capillary length for human blood may be
evaluated as:
a ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  0:062
1060  9:81
r
¼ 3:453  103m
To obtain the detached droplet volume V, we need to include
the empirical Harkins and Brown correction factor F, [20] to Tate’s
Law, to get:
V ¼ pa2RF
R
V1=3
 

ð3Þ
The H–B correction factor is tabulated normally as a function
of R/V1/3 and less commonly in terms of R/a*. For small oriﬁces the
function F approaches unity from below as R/V1/3 tends to zero,
while, as R/V1/3 increases, the correction factor decreases towards
a minimum of 0.6 at R/V1/3 0.85 before rising to around 0.65
and then ﬁnally dropping away again as R/V1/3 becomes greater
than 1.5. Using Eq. (3), the surface tension of a liquid may be
calculated by measuring the volume/mass of the detached
spherical droplet for a known oriﬁce size.
In the context of blood droplet formation, this idealised
cylindrical oriﬁce is of limited use as blood may drip from wounds
of all shapes and sizes or from weapons, body surfaces or other
items at the crime scene where the blood directly gathers on the
surface before a pendent drop is formed at some appropriate
point. Droplet formation on the underside of a solid surface is
theoretically similar to the dripping that takes place from an
oriﬁce of sufﬁciently large diameter such that the pendent droplet
reaches its maximum volume before it is able to pin itself to the
circumference of the oriﬁce itself. In these cases the pendent drop
formation is said to be ‘angle-limited’ rather than ‘radius-limited’
since the liquid surface on the droplet runs continuously into the
liquid surface at the large oriﬁce or, equivalently, on to the solid
surface itself.
The important consequence for these cases is that the pendent
drop volume will depend on the contact angle with the surface of
the solid material or the liquid at the mouth of the oriﬁce itself. In
the former case, the wetting ability of the liquid on that surface is
critical while in the latter case the expectation is that the drop
surface will spread outwards, rather than neck inwards, to achieve
zero contact angle and hence maximum surface tension support
for the pendent drop. It should also be noted that even when the
drop is pinned to the mouth of a small oriﬁce, the thickness of the
oriﬁce wall and the hydrophobic/hydrophilic nature of the material
from which it is made will determine whether the pining occurs to
the inside wall (the hydrophobic case) or to the outside wall (the
hydrophilic case).
The largest pendent drops will occur in angle-limited situations
and, for the case of a zero contact angle, the detached droplet will
have the maximum possible volume for a free liquid droplet. An
estimate of this ‘maximum droplet volume’ was provided by
Campbell [26] in the context of condensing metal vapours on solid
electrodes. Here it was assumed that the threshold for the
detaching droplet occurs when the pendent drop forms a
hemispherical shape tethered to the surface by a liquid bridge
that meets the surface at zero contact angle. Since the hemispher-
ical volume reforms 
into a 
spherical droplet shortly after
2 
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934


--- PAGE 3 ---

detachment, Campbell’s resulting formula applied to human blood
(using a* given previously) provides an estimate of the diameter d
of this spherical droplet of maximum volume, given by:
d ¼ 22=3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3g
rg
s
¼ 1:944  a ¼ 6:71mm 
ð4Þ
This corresponds to a maximum detached droplet volume of
158 mL for human blood.
2.2. The calculation of the droplet proﬁle — the pendent drop method
To overcome the difﬁculties in dealing with the H–B correction,
an alternative approach was developed based on calculating the
proﬁle of pendent drop under the combined forces of gravity,
surface tension and the pressure difference across the drop surface
using the axisymmetric solution of the Young–Laplace equation
[27]. Thus, not only could the theoretical proﬁle shapes be
compared with those observed experimentally for the pendent
drop prior to detachment, but the proﬁle for maximum volume
could be calculated as well. However, until numerical solutions of
the differential equation using digital computers became available
from the 1970s, the applicability and detail that could be drawn
from these calculations were limited. Nevertheless, novel sit-
uations such as the formation of pendent drops on conical tips [28]
were tackled using this method.
Following on from work on radius-limited pendent droplets
[29,30], a detailed study of both radius and angle-limited drops was
reported [31] and later investigated in greater detail [32,33]. These
latter studies include tabulated data on radius-limited detached
droplets as well as the variation in maximum pendent droplet
volume as a function of contact angle on ﬂat horizontal surfaces. The
relationship between surface shape and droplet formation has been
studied to a much lesser extent. Most notably, pendent drops on solid
conical tips have been the subject of droplet proﬁle calculations
basedontheLaplacemethod,onthebasisofazerocontactanglewith
the tip surface [34]. Parallel experimental studies were undertaken
using what were regarded as ‘perfectly wetting’ liquids [35].
2.3. Prediction of detached droplet volumes
Building on these theoretical developments, some of the
calculations most relevant to the current work will now be
discussed. First the approach developed here for the prediction of
detached droplet volumes from an oriﬁce will be presented.
Eq. (3) was devised originally for the calculation of the surface
tension of a liquid from measurements of the detached droplet
volume V. As such, the H–B correction function F is calculated using
the measured value for V. In this current work, it is the prediction of
V itself that is of interest and its comparison with that measured
experimentally so Eq. (3) cannot be used directly. Consequently, an
alternative method for deducing the appropriate correction factor
was needed. This was based on an iterative calculation where the
uncorrected volume was used as an initial estimate of the true
detached volume in the calculation of F, leading to a calculation of a
fresh estimate of V which is closer to the true value. This process
was continued using the new estimate to re-calculate the
correction factor until applying a further iteration did not
signiﬁcantly change the value of the detached volume. The so-
called convergence criterion was taken to be when the volume
remains unchanged to four signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
To generate these corrected volumes, Eq. (3) may be written in
iterative form as:
Vnþ1 ¼ pa2RF
R
V1=3
n
  
!
ð5Þ
where V1 ¼ pa2R and n speciﬁes the number of the iteration. The
relevant detached droplet volume V was calculated by incorporat-
ing the appropriate value of F. It was found that the iteration
converged well, within two to six iterations, to a ﬁnal value of V, by
using the uncorrected volume V1 as the ﬁrst estimate. To calculate
F at each iterative step, the tabulated values of the function [23]
were preferred to the analytical form [25], partly as they extended
to larger values of the abscissa and partly as they more accurately
represented the original, experimentally-derived form of the
function [21]. Simple linear interpolation was used to determine
intermediate values where needed. It has been shown that for large
values of the abscissa the function F is inversely proportional to
R/V1/3 [26]. This approach was used to extend F from R/V1/3 = 1.59
up to R/V1/3 = 2.35 and, by matching this section to the ﬁnal few
points of the tabulated data [23], the constant of proportionality
was determined. This gave the form of F over this range as:
F 
0:855
R=V1=3
 

ð6Þ
The constant derived here (0.855) is very close to the value of
0.845 estimated in reference [26] where a graphical ﬁgure showing
the form of F over the full range is also provided.
Using the appropriate values of g=r given in Section 3, the
variation of detached droplet volume as a function of oriﬁce
diameter for both water and for the deﬁbrinated horse blood used
later in this work, is shown in Fig. 1. The difference in volumes for
the two liquids is due mainly to the larger surface tension constant
for water. In both cases the droplet volume increases monotoni-
cally with oriﬁce diameter in an approximately linear fashion. This
represents the formation of radius-limited droplets. Eventually,
the liquid ceases to pin on to the oriﬁce wall and instead contacts
directly with the surrounding liquid surface at zero contact angle
to form an angle-dependent droplet whose detached volume is
independent of the oriﬁce size. This represents the formation
of droplets of maximum volume from an oriﬁce. The predictions
in Fig. 1 show that, for horse blood, this threshold occurs at around
16 mm contact diameter, with a detached droplet volume of
205 mL.
3. Materials and methods
The basic experimental technique for producing blood droplets
from oriﬁce tips is fairly straightforward though care needs to be
taken at various points to ensure the reproducibility of results.
Deﬁbrinated horse blood was obtained from TCS Biosciences Ltd.,
Fig. 1. Detached droplet volume under radius-limited conditions as a function of
oriﬁce diameter (drop weight theory).
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934 
3


--- PAGE 4 ---

Buckingham, UK and stored in a refrigerator. This material has been
shown to be suitable alternative to human blood for blood
dynamics and pattern analysis research and retains its properties
for up to twelve days of storage [36]. All samples were agitated and
brought to room temperature before use. Each sample was used for
only a short period before a fresh amount of blood was taken from
the 
refrigerator. 
These 
procedures 
were 
found 
to 
produce
consistent results.
A glass separating funnel ﬁtted with a tap acted as a reservoir
for the blood and was secured to a Kaiser rePro photographic
camera (copy) stand. A tapered, plastic nozzle (tip diameter
0.5 mm) ﬁtted to the reservoir allowed for the easy attachment of
the relevant bored brass nozzle. For the un-bored nozzles, a short
piece of ﬂexible polythene hose was used to link the reservoir to
the plastic nozzle which was then held in position against the brass
nozzle tip to generate the formation of angle-limited blood
droplets from that nozzle surface. Droplets could be produced
reliably and at a deﬁned rate by careful control of the tap.
Sets of nozzles were manufactured from cylindrical brass rod
that were machined into a conical shape at one end with cone
angles of 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 degrees — this last
corresponding to a ﬂat surface. One of the sets was un-bored while
the other sets had holes of 1 mm, 2 mm or 3 mm diameter bored
along the symmetry axis to produce a nozzle tip that had an oriﬁce
of known diameter with conical edges at the speciﬁed angle. A full
set of angles with the 2 mm bore was produced while the 1 mm
bore was restricted to the smaller angles – 30 and 60 while the
3 mm bore corresponded to the larger angles – 90, 120, 150 and
180. In total 18 nozzles were manufactured. The inner nozzle
diameters were measured using a low powered microscope with
calibrated graticule and found to be equal to or a very little less
than the designed diameter; those measured values are given in
Table 1.
Using the twelve bored nozzles, radius-limited droplets were
formed by ensuring that the blood was not allowed to wet the
conical nozzle surface around the tip while, in separate experi-
ments, angle-limited droplets were formed by pre-wetting the tip
area with blood. Another set of measurements using deminer-
alised water produced corresponding radius-limited droplets,
these results being used for calibration and comparison purposes.
Droplet formation on the un-bored nozzles was subject to pre-
wetting of the nozzle surface with blood and careful adjustment
of the plastic nozzle that was delivering the blood from the
reservoir.
Imaging of selected droplets on each tip was carried out using a
Motic digital camera and images were analysed with Motic Images
Plus 2.0 imaging and analysis software. Examples of the droplet
images produced on wetted nozzles are shown in Fig. 2. Droplets
were counted and their drop rate measured automatically using an
optical gate linked to a Pasco measurement system. Droplet volumes
were obtained gravimetrically from an accumulation of between ten
and ﬁfty droplets, ensuring that for all measurements a weight of at
least 0.5 g was recorded to four decimal places. Droplet formation
rates of around one per minute were adopted. It has been suggested
that the optimum rate should be no faster than one drop every three
minutes [21] but such formation times were found to lead to physical
changes to the blood itself, in and around the tip, which led to poor
reproducibility. Each measurement was taken at least three times
and a mean value calculated. Contact angles were measured on the
images using a tool within the Motic software.
All measurements were stored within Excel spreadsheets
where all the data processing and analysis was carried out. Both
the surface tension and density of the blood are relevant to the
analysis of the results. As is evident from Eq. (3), the detached
droplet volume depends on the constant a which is a function of
the ratio of g/r. Further, since the H–B correction factor F is
independent of the properties of the liquid, it has been shown
[28,32] that, for the same conical tip, the ratio of the radius-limited
droplet volumes from two different liquids – say, blood (Vb) and
water (Vw) – follow from Eq. (3), giving:
Vb
Vw
¼
gbrw
gwrb
 
3=2
ð7Þ
This relationship continues to apply to angle-limited droplets if
the contact angles for the two liquids are the same. It follows that
the distinct values of rb and gb are not needed to interpret these
results, only the ratio of these quantities and that may be
calculated from data obtained through a series of similar
measurements of droplet volume performed using blood and
water, for which both parameters are known with some precision.
Using the set of results for radius-limited droplets, to be
described in the following section (Table 1), together with the
density (r = 998 kg m3) and surface tension (g = 0.0728 N m1) for
Table 1
Drop volume results for water and horse blood for non-wetted nozzles.
Nozzle diameter 2R mm 
Nozzle cone angle deg 
Water 
Horse blood
Drop volume 
Standard error 
Drop volume 
Standard error
Vw mL 
mL 
Vb mL 
mL
1.00 
Theorya
19.1 
– 
16.4 
–
0.99 
30 
20.1 
0.1 
16.3 
0.3
0.99 
60 
20.3 
0.1 
15.5
b
2.00 
Theorya
33.9 
– 
29.2 
–
1.96 
30 
34.0 
0.4 
29.1 
0.3
1.94 
60 
34.0 
0.4 
29.7 
1.0
1.98 
90 
36.2 
0.2 
29.6 
0.4
2.00 
120 
38.4 
0.4 
30.5 
0.2
2.02 
150 
41.2 
0.4 
31.4 
0.5
1.98 
180 
36.4 
0.2 
29.2 
0.1
3.00 
Theorya
47.5 
– 
41.0 
–
2.99 
90 
49.7 
0.3 
40.0 
0.4
2.94 
120 
51.9 
0.2 
42.6 
0.5
2.99 
150 
53.9 
0.9 
42.8 
0.7
2.94 
180 
55.2 
0.6 
47.1 
1.0
a Calculated from Eq. (3) as described in the text.
b Only a single measurement was made due to accidental damage to the nozzle.
4 
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934


--- PAGE 5 ---

demineralised water at 20 C [37], the mean ratio for deﬁbrinated
horse blood was calculated as:
gb
rb
¼ 6:35  0:05  105m3s2
where the uncertainty is quoted as the standard error. Taking the
density of horse blood as 1050 kg m3 [36], this result gives the
surface tension of the blood, under the conditions of these
experiments, as 0.0667 N m1; this appears to be in line with
values for surface tension for blood from other mammalian
species. 
It 
should 
be 
emphasised 
that 
in 
the 
calculations
throughout this work it is this ratio that is utilised in calculations
rather than the individual values of these two properties. The
capillary length for horse blood, derived from this ratio and used in
subsequent calculations, is a ¼ 3:598  103m.
4. Results
4.1. Radius-limited droplets: non-wetted nozzles
The detached droplet volumes from the conical nozzles, for
both water and blood, where the liquid was not allowed to wet the
nozzle tip prior to droplet formation, are given in Table 1. The
volumes predicted for each nozzle diameter according to the drop
weight theory (Sections 2.1 and 2.3) incorporating the H–B
correction (Eq. (3)), are included here for comparison. It is clear
that, for each nozzle, the detached volumes for horse blood are all
less than those for water due to the higher surface tension for the
latter liquid. For the most acute cone angles the detached volumes
for both liquids are very close to those predicted theoretically.
Across all cone angles these volumes remain close to the
theoretical values but are on average a little larger for the more
obtuse angles and the widest nozzle diameter as these conditions
tend to encourage slight wetting by the liquid. Since faster drop
rates lead to an increase in the detached droplet volume [21] it is
also possible that working here with a rate of around one drop per
minute rather than one every three minutes or more has
contributed to these experimental volumes being generally larger
than the theoretical values. Comparison between the droplet
volumes for the two liquids suggests that it is probable that some
of the scatter in these values, outside of the standard error, may be
attributed to microscopic imperfections in each nozzle arising
from the machining process during manufacture.
4.2. Angle-limited droplets: wetted nozzles
The experimental detached droplet volumes where the nozzle
tip was pre-wetted with blood prior to formation of the droplet,
are given in Table 2. These include outcomes from the non-bored
cone tips where the pendent droplet was allowed to form slowly
by blood ﬂowing across the cone surface. Uncertainties are
included here again as standard errors. Note that these appear
consistently larger for the 150 and particularly the 180 tips, than
for the smaller cone angles. It is suggested that this is due to
difﬁculties in ensuring a consistent and uniform pre-wetting of
the tips and, for these large cone angles, a longer contact line
between the pendant droplet and the tip and a greater area of
wetting. These factors lead to more variation in the net surface
tension force acting to hold the growing droplet in place and
hence more variation in the consequent detached droplet volume
between repeat measurements.
There are three principal conclusions to be drawn from these
results. Firstly, the pre-wetting allows much larger, angle-limited
pendent droplets to accumulate on a tip and the volume increases
signiﬁcantly with increasing cone angle. Secondly, for the 30 tips,
these detached droplet volumes are only a little larger than those
found for the non-wetted tips of the same cone angle (Table 1) with
that for the non-bored tip being the smallest and the others
increasing slightly with nozzle diameter. Finally, although there is
some scatter in the values, detached droplet volumes from a given
cone angle are generally independent of oriﬁce diameter, including
those from the non-bored tips. In other words the volume, for a
given cone angle, is the same whether it was formed on a bored
or non-bored tip. The slightly lower volume obtained for the
Fig. 2. Droplet formation on wetted 90 conical nozzles; (a) 3 mm oriﬁce (b) non-bored cone.
Table 2
Drop volume results for horse blood for wetted bored and non-bored cone tips.
Nozzle diameter 2R mm 
Nozzle cone
angle deg
Horse blood
Drop volume 
Standard
error
V mL 
mL
0.99 
30 
30.5 
1.6
0.99 
60 
47.6 
0.4
1.96 
30 
34.1 
0.6
1.94 
60 
48.2 
0.7
1.98 
90 
63.5 
1.3
2.00 
120 
85.3 
0.7
2.02 
150 
112 
4
1.98 
180 
157 
5
2.99 
90 
65.3 
0.8
2.94 
120 
87.4 
1.0
2.99 
150 
107 
1
2.94 
180 
154 
6
Non-bored
cone tips
30 
28.4 
0.3
60 
45.6 
0.9
90 
62.5 
1.4
120 
85.5 
1.5
150 
116 
2
180 
138 
3
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934 
5


--- PAGE 6 ---

non-bored 180 tip may be due to the experimental difﬁculties in
facilitating the ﬂow of blood on to the underside surface under
those conditions. The outcomes for the 180 tips show a maximum
detached droplet volume of order 150 mL. These results are
displayed graphically as a function of cone angle in Fig. 4. This
ﬁgure includes comparison with theoretical values and will be
discussed in Section 5.2.
5. Discussion
Next, the principal consequences of these results will be
discussed which, for convenience, may be separated into three
areas. Firstly, the concept of a maximum droplet volume will be
examined, then the inﬂuence of the sharpness of the source, as
deﬁned by cone angle, will be explored and ﬁnally, the relationship
between the detached droplet volume and the general condition of
the source will be discussed.
5.1. Estimates of a maximum droplet volume
The detached droplet volume predictions in Section 2.3 and the
experimental results presented in Section 4.2 provide estimates of
the maximum droplet volume that is possible from detachment
from a surface or oriﬁce. This will occur when the surface is ﬂat and
is independent of how the blood has accumulated on that surface.
It is beneﬁcial to explore this concept in more detail, including
alternative methods of calculation, in order to better understand
the factors that most affect the value of this quantity and its
sensitivity to them.
Using the pendent drop proﬁle method, the threshold mini-
mum oriﬁce radius has been calculated for the formation of the
maximum droplet volume for a liquid which completely wets a
solid surface (u = 0) [32]. Using this formula, with the capillary
length for horse blood, gives this radius as:
Rth ¼ 2:2766a ¼ 2:2766  3:598  103 ¼ 8:19 mm
The consequent pendent droplet volume is then given by
Ref. [32]:
Vp ¼ 6:7045  a3 ¼ 6:7045  ð3:598  103Þ3 ¼ 312:3  mL
Hence, the detached droplet volume, calculated using the
algorithm described earlier to generate the H–B correction factor, is
given by:
V ¼ Vp  F
R
V1=3
 

¼ 312:3  0:5879 ¼ 183:6  mL
This is equivalent to a detached droplet diameter of 7.052 mm.
For comparison with experimental values where the contact
angle is not zero, an adjustment to this approach needs to be
included. A table of correction factors to the pendent droplet
volume, by contact angle, has been theoretically derived [33]. For
this present work where a contact angle of 25 was measured for a
droplet formed on a ﬂat, wetted brass surface, the consequent
detached droplet volume may be calculated, using the appropriate
factor, as:
V ¼ ð5:5080=6:7045Þ  183:6 ¼ 150:8  mL
Using these factors [33], predicted maximum detached droplet
volumes as a function of contact angle may be calculated and are
shown graphically in Fig. 3. This demonstrates how crucial is the
wetting behaviour of the blood on the surface in determining the
volume of the detached droplet as the volume decreases quite
rapidly once the angle is above 20 or so. Moreover, the carefully
controlled and stable conditions assumed in the theoretical models
and, to some extent, achievable in laboratory experiments will not
be sustained in case-work scenarios, with the result that droplet
volumes will be commonly much lower than these predictions.
In contrast, previous work on droplet formation on conical tips
[34,35] assumed ‘completely wetting liquids’ — that is, zero
contact angle. The data needed to calculate the detached droplet
volumes were extracted from the graphs presented in that paper
[34] rather than from tabulated values and so any outcomes from
this will be subject to further uncertainty. Despite this limitation,
droplet volumes for horse blood have been calculated for each of
the cone angles used in this current work and are given in Table 3.
The contact angle correction factors [33] have been applied to
these volumes and these estimates are also presented in this table
together with the mean experimental values from the results
presented in Section 4.2. For zero contact angle, the maximum
detached droplet volume is 191 mL, decreasing to 157 mL under the
experimental conditions measured here.
Finally, the maximum droplet volume may also be estimated
using the approximation of Campbell [26] applied to the horse
blood used here. The corresponding droplet diameter is given by
Eq. (4), incorporating the value of the capillary length for horse
blood derived earlier.
d ¼ 22=3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3g
rg
s
¼ 1:944  a ¼ 7:00mm
This is equivalent to a droplet volume of 179 mL.
Table 4 summarises all these estimates of the maximum droplet
volume together with the average for the experimental results
described here (ﬁnal row in Table 3). There is a fair level of
consistency across the different approaches for zero contact angle
while for two of those the application of the contact angle
Fig. 3. Maximum detached droplet volume for horse blood as a function of contact
angle using data from reference [33].
Fig. 4. Detached droplet volume as a function of cone angle for wetted tips.
6 
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934


--- PAGE 7 ---

correction factor yields similar volumes, both of which are close to
what has been measured experimentally, taken as the mean of the
three results presented in Table 3.
Of course, all these droplet volumes relate to deﬁbrinated horse
blood. On the basis that these theoretical predictions have been
validated by this experimental data, the equivalent maximum
droplet volume for human blood, may also be calculated according
to drop shape theory. Using the capillary length for human blood
given in Section 2.1 and assuming the same contact angle, the
maximum detached droplet volume is given by:
V ¼ ð5:5080=6:7045Þ  0:5879  276:0 ¼ 133:3  mL
The difference in this value, from that for horse blood, reveals
the relative sensitivity of this quantity to the ratio g=r for the
blood.
Within the bloodstain pattern analysis discipline, the concept of
a ‘standard’, ‘normal’ or ‘typical’ droplet volume has been used,
though its meaning has not been clearly deﬁned. A value of 50 mL is
commonly assigned to this quantity. Originally, it appears to have
related to an average droplet volume released from typical body
wounds under passive conditions but became conﬂated with the
idea of this representing a maximum as, despite being an average,
volumes very much larger than this occurred rarely in casework
[38]. Fundamentally, as has been shown here, a maximum droplet
volume is a valid quantity but in practice whether under laboratory
or casework conditions, its magnitude, depends very much on the
nature of the surface or oriﬁce from which it is released so that its
measurement in real circumstances will yield values that are
normally very much less than that predicted theoretically for an
ideal system. Hence, in that sense, for a given set of circumstances
there will be a typical droplet volume but that quantity will not be
transferable in any meaningful way to any, quite different scenario.
5.2. Droplet volumes from conical tips
The experimental detached droplet volumes from all wetted
conical tips, together with the theoretical estimates calculated
using published data [34], are presented in Table 3 and graphically
as a function of cone angle, in Fig. 4. The contact angle correction
factors were assigned using the experimentally measured angles
given in Table 3. The contact angle for the 30 tip could not be
determined experimentally so an estimated value by extrapolation
was adopted here. It should be noted that the table of published
factors [33] apply to droplets formed on ﬂat surfaces and their
transfer to conical surfaces should be regarded as an approxima-
tion. Nevertheless, this table shows good agreement amongst the
results for the different oriﬁce sizes and the non-bored tips which
suggest that, within the range examined here, the detached droplet
volume is independent of whether the source of the blood droplet
is an oriﬁce or a solid tip and, if the former, is also independent of
the oriﬁce size. There is more scatter for the two largest cone
angles which may be attributed to the difﬁculties in experimen-
tally delivering the blood to the tip under those conditions. The
theoretical values appear to under-estimate the experimental
volumes to some extent for the 90 and 120 angles, though
elsewhere the agreement is reasonable. The relationship between
volume and angle forms a smooth curve which, if extrapolated
below 30, suggests a limiting value of between 20–30 mL for a
detached droplet from a conical tip as the cone angle sharpens
towards zero. This particular conclusion deserves further investi-
gation.
5.3. Droplet size and source condition
It is useful to discuss the range of droplet sizes that have been
found experimentally in this work and their relationship to the
conditions under which they were formed. This may provide some
underpinning scientiﬁc basis to the interpretation of droplets and
stains found in casework circumstances. Within the range of sources
examined here, there are clearly maximum and minimum droplet
volumes released and these will depend very much on the degree of
wetting of the source by the blood. The relevant experimental values
are summarised in Table 5 where mean values are taken across the
relevant individual measurements presented earlier.
These results suggest that for those cones with the more acute
angles, the range of potential droplet volumes falls within a
Table 3
Detached droplet volumes for conical tips; theory and experiment.
Cone tip
angle degrees
Detached droplet volume V mL 
Exptal contact
angle degrees
Theoretical estimates of detached
droplet volume [34,33] V mL
Cone tip type
1 mm oriﬁce 
2 mm oriﬁce 
3 mm oriﬁce 
Solid cone 
Mean exptal droplet
volume mL
For zero
contact angle
With contact
angle correction
30 
30.5 
34.1 
– 
28.4 
31.0 
(5)est
31.6 
31.3
60 
47.6 
48.2 
– 
45.6 
47.1 
10 
39.7 
38.3
90 
– 
63.5 
65.3 
62.5 
63.8 
16 
56.2 
51.4
120 
– 
85.3 
87.4 
85.5 
86.1 
19 
78.4 
69.4
150 
– 
111 
106 
116 
111 
22 
122 
104
180 
– 
156 
153 
138 
149 
25 
191 
157
Table 4
Estimates of the maximum droplet volume for deﬁbrinated horse blood.
Contact angle
degrees
Source 
Maximum droplet volume V mL
Zero 
Drop shape theory [32] 
184
Drop weight theory [21,23] 
205
Drop weight theory + Campbell approx. [26] 
179
Drop shape theory; conical tips [34] 
191
25
Drop shape theory [33] 
151
Drop shape theory; conical tips [34] 
157
Experiment (this work) 
149  6
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934 
7


--- PAGE 8 ---

narrower range and hence the degree of wetting of the source is
less signiﬁcant. In contrast, for much wider angles and approach-
ing a ﬂat surface, the range is much larger and much more
dependent on the extent of wetting and source surface character-
istics. Clearly there are larger oriﬁce sizes, not investigated in this
study, which will yield larger droplet volumes under non-wetted
conditions but these may be predicted using Eq. (3). For any cone
angle, once an oriﬁce is sufﬁciently large that the pendent drop
pins to its circumference, the detached droplet volume will be
deﬁned by the oriﬁce diameter and not by the cone angle. The
maximum detached droplet volume from any sufﬁciently large
oriﬁce remains at around 150 mL under ideal conditions.
With casework examples in mind, interest is focused on the
results in the ﬁnal two columns of Table 5. Comparison of a weapon
tip with the closest conical equivalent given here would allow
estimation of the volume and diameter of passively detached
droplets under gravity, taking into account the degree of wetting of
the weapon by the blood. Further work on tips with different
geometric shapes would provide additional reference data for such
comparisons.
It is pertinent to compare these results with published droplet
sizes released under gravity from real and model weapon tips of
differing curvature, using porcine blood [17]. The difference in the
g=r factor means that droplet volumes will be expected to be
around 5% and diameters around 1.5% larger for horse than for
porcine blood. Direct comparison is not possible with the conical
tips used here but some general comments may be made. Across all
types of tips investigated, the detached droplet volumes were in
the range 37.4–121.8 mL with the larger volumes being released
from surfaces with larger radii of curvature [17]. This corresponds
very well to the results shown for wetted conical tips in Table 5
where volumes from 31 to 149 mL were found. Surface roughness
effects were found not to be strong factor in relation to detached
droplet volume and, although contact angle effects are discussed,
no detail on this is provided for the experimentally measured
droplets nor is the degree of pre-wetting of the surface discussed
speciﬁcally [17].
6. Detached droplets from swing-cast-off
Having discussed the passive detachment of blood droplets
under gravity, it is of interest to extend these ideas to the active
detachment of droplets under other forces, most notably the
centrifugal force generated during swing-cast off. Here, simple
theoretical approaches to cast-off will be presented and then
applied to some recently published data. It is believed this is the
ﬁrst time that a mathematical model of swing cast-off has been
applied to the quantitative prediction of the sizes of ejected blood
droplets. For motion in a horizontal swing plane, any contribution
from gravity may be neglected while for a vertical swing plane the
gravitational force will make a contribution depending on the
point in the motion at which the droplets are ejected. Nevertheless,
in most practical circumstances the gravitational force is much
smaller than that from centrifugal action so will not be considered
here. 
Experimental 
studies 
have 
been 
published 
where 
a
mechanical device designed to operate in a vertical plane has
been used to generate droplets under controlled conditions [12,16]
and data from these will be used to test mathematical models for
the ejection mechanism.
6.1. Review of swing cast-off research
The fundamental action of ejecting liquid droplets by centrifu-
gal force generated by a rotation mechanism is the basis of many
applications where dispersal of ‘atomised’ liquid is required; for
example, the action of agricultural sprays [39] and in chemical and
food manufacture. There is a signiﬁcant literature around this topic
which facilitates our understanding of the creation of blood spatter
droplets by swing cast-off action. It is not the present purpose to
review that literature but simply to refer to some points that are
most relevant to the current analysis. Depending of the ﬂow rate of
the liquid along the rotating arm, there are three types of
disintegration that can occur. At the lowest ﬂow rates, droplets are
ejected directly from the arm then, as the ﬂow increases, liquid
ligaments may be formed [18]. A transition region may be
identiﬁed where features of both these mechanisms occur [39].
At the highest ﬂow rates the liquid is ejected as sheets [39]. Both
the ligaments and sheets disintegrate further once they travel
away from the rotation mechanism and droplets may then be
formed.
In recent years there has been some interest in producing swing
cast-off droplets under carefully controlled experimental con-
ditions. A system for generating cast-off blood droplets has been
described [16] which is based on an aluminium disc of radius 0.3 m
rotating in a vertical plane with narrow radial grooves milled on
one face. These were intended to guide the blood as it ﬂows
outwards to be ejected at the disc perimeter. Subsequent
trajectories for droplets produced by this device at a range of
tangential velocities have been measured and some additional
quantitative data on droplet diameters and shape oscillations were
obtained using high-speed photography [12]. Images from these
studies show that, under these experimental conditions, the blood
droplets may be released by disintegration of a ligament generated
by the centrifugal force on blood within the channels [16].
Examples of the measurement of cast-off droplet diameters
produced under a range of rotational speeds have been published
from work using this system but these were not interpreted using
any quantitative model. A simpler mechanical device for this
Table 5
Summary of mean experimental detached droplet volumes from non-wetted and wetted tips.
Cone tip angle degrees 
Oriﬁce diameter mm 
Droplet volume (non-wetted) V mL 
Droplet volume (wetted)a V mL 
Droplet diameter (wetted)a mm
30 
1 
16 
31 
3.9
2 
30
60 
1 
16 
47 
4.5
2 
30
90 
2 
30 
64 
5.0
3 
43
120 
2 
30 
86 
5.5
3 
43
150 
2 
30 
111 
6.0
3 
43
180 
2 
30 
149 
6.6
3 
43
a Including the result from the non-bored tip in this average.
8 
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934


--- PAGE 9 ---

purpose has been used to generate cast-off stain patterns and these
have been analysed in terms of stain density, aspect ratio and
hence impact angle, again using high speed photography [14].
More recently, 
cast-off 
patterns have been produced from
mechanically driven weapons and the trajectories carefully
interpreted to gain a better idea of how the pattern is formed
from droplets ejected at different points across the swing arc [18].
This shows one example of an image of ligament disintegration
from a baseball bat tip travelling close to 15 ms1 but no speciﬁc
examples of droplet sizes are provided from this work.
6.2. Physical principles of swing cast-off
For swing cast-off action, the key modiﬁcation to the model for
passive release of blood under gravity is now that the gravitational
force mg is replaced by the centrifugal force mv2=L or the
equivalent mv2L where v is the linear (tangential) velocity at
the point of detachment and v is the angular velocity of the swing
action; L is the radius of the circular rotational path. This
centrifugal force Fc is generated by the torque applied to the
weapon.
It is important to note that for passive dripping under gravity
the force causing detachment of a droplet is the same at all points
across the 
system. 
For the 
centrifugal 
force 
however, 
the
magnitude increases linearly with distance along the rotating
arm. Hence, with sufﬁcient blood mass, it will usually be the case
that this force is different across the blood mass which leads to it
expanding as well as travelling outward along the radial direction.
If a droplet is formed statically on the weapon then the motion
on leaving the weapon will be tangential to the point of ejection.
However, if there is signiﬁcant blood and there is motion of the
blood mass radially along the weapon prior to droplet ejection,
then the initial trajectory will not be purely tangential but will be
the combination of the tangential speed with any radial velocity
component along the weapon itself, though that is likely to be
small compared to the tangential component. For droplets released
by ligament disintegration, the path followed may be more
complex depending on the motion of the ligament itself and the
point at which the droplet detaches. Images of droplet formation
have been published [12,16,18,39].
For a manufactured device, such as a rotary atomiser, which
produces droplets from a continuous liquid ﬂow, a ﬂuid dynamics
analysis has been used to derive expressions for ligament
formation and the droplet diameters released under different
conditions [39]. However, this approach cannot be directly applied
to blood droplets formed under swing cast-off conditions from a
weapon so more basic approaches are needed to estimate droplet
size here. Two models will be considered: the ﬁrst where the
droplet is release from an oriﬁce or similar structure on the
rotating surface and another, more appropriate to release from a
ligament, where the droplet is formed directly from the blood mass
itself.
Replacing the gravitational force mg in the model for droplet
formation from an oriﬁce as described in Section 2.1 (Eq. (3))
leads to:
V ¼ p 2gL
rv2
 

RF
R
V1=3
 

ð8Þ
The capillary length a* is now no longer a constant so it is more
convenient to express the formula as shown here. This expression
implies that higher velocities will result in the formation of smaller
blood droplets.
This result may be expected to apply where a droplet is released
after being pinned to some oriﬁce or similar physical feature
under radius-limited conditions on the rotating weapon. For the
experimental system described previously [16] this would be the
1 mm by 1 mm grooves cut radially on the rotating disc where the
magnitude of the surface tension force will depend on the contact
length of the blood around the end of the groove on the disc
circumference.
An alternative, yet quite simple model that does not directly
relate to the dimension of any feature on the weapon has been
described in the context of the disintegration of liquids –
‘atomisation’ – by means of a rotating cup [40]. This approach is
similar to Campbell’s method [26] for determining the maximum
droplet volume released from a ﬂat surface which was discussed in
Section 2.1. The droplet separates from the bulging of blood on the
weapon where there is no pinning to any feature on the weapon.
Given that formation of a blood ligament is one instance of this
effect, it is likely that this model is more appropriate for droplets
released from a fragmenting ligament. Hence, the condition for
separation is given by equating the centrifugal force to the surface
tension around the contact length between the emerging droplet
on the bulging blood mass which is assumed to be equal to the
detaching droplet circumference:
mv2
L
¼ pgd
Writing the mass in terms of the density and volume of the
droplet and re-arranging for d gives:
d ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
6gL
r
s
1
v
ð9Þ
This result (Eq. (9)), though very much an order of magnitude
model, implies that droplet diameter d and linear velocity v are in
inverse proportion. In contrast, the ﬁrst model for droplet release,
governed by some oriﬁce or structural feature of deﬁned size on
the weapon (Eq. (8)), suggests a basic relationship governed by:
d / v2=3
This is modiﬁed to some small extent by the H–B correction
factor F.
6.3. Testing models of droplet release
Using published data generated by the rotating disc system
[12,16], these two models have been used to calculate theoretical
estimates for the diameters of blood droplets released under those
experimental 
conditions. 
These 
are 
then 
compared 
to 
the
experimental values in Table 6. As porcine blood was used in
these experiments, appropriate published density and surface
tension values [12] were adopted in these calculations, using
g=r ¼ 0:0638=1054 ¼ 6:053  105 m3s2. Although values for
these parameters from two sources are quoted in [12], both give
similar results for this ratio. It has been assumed here that the
channels in the disc are fully ﬁlled with blood and the surface
tension line at the edge of the disc was approximated to a circle of
radius 0.5 mm for convenience.
These results 
shows that, 
although 
they are of 
similar
magnitudes, all the theoretical values are larger than those found
experimentally and indeed, if this comparison was done on a
droplet volume basis, a far larger discrepancy would be evident
between theory and experiment. For lower swing velocities the
predictions of Eq. (8) appear better while for the highest velocities,
Eq. (9) provides slightly closer agreement to experiment. This can
be rationalised by considering that at these lowest rotational
speeds the blood movement along the channel in the rotating disc
will be lower and so direct detachment of droplets from the edge of
the disc is more likely. On the other hand at high speeds the more
rapid movement of blood along the channel will produce ligaments
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934 
9


--- PAGE 10 ---

from which droplets will be released, the size of which will not be
directly related to the channel size. For the ﬁrst model, the droplet
volumes can be reduced to some extent by assuming the channels
are only partly ﬁlled with blood but this factor is unknown. The
second model assumes the surface tension force depends directly
on the droplet diameter whereas we would expect some necking to
occur on the ligament leading to a smaller detached droplet, as the
retaining force would be less. Neither model considers the rate of
droplet release or the blood ﬂow rate along the channels. These
factors may at least partly explain the discrepancies in Table 6.
It is of interest to review the experimental data on the basis of a
power law relationship between v and d and to compare that with
the dependency between these quantities describe earlier for these
two models. Any power law relationship between d and v is most
clearly determined by a graph of Ln d vs Ln v. These are presented in
Fig. 5. The gradient of the equation for the linear regression line
through the experimental data points is 1.01 which clearly shows
that, across this range of speeds, the dependency of these data is
most closely modelled by Eq. (9). This is consistent with the
observations of droplet release from ligaments reported in these
experiments [16]. In contrast, the calculated power for Eq. (8) was
found to be 0.69 which is very close to the dependency of 2/3
before application of the H–B correction factor. An empirical
adjustment to Eq. (9) which fairly accurately predicts these
experimental data, may be made on the basis of the regression line
through the experimental data which yields (for d in m):
d ¼ 0:0060
v
ð10Þ
Further development of theoretical models for swing-cast off
must await more detailed experimental data, in particular where
differing methods for releasing the blood from the rotating
disc and speciﬁc photographic data on the mechanism of release
for droplets under differing tangential velocities, have been
investigated. Further key factors are the ﬂow rate along the
channels and the rate of release of droplets, given these are known
to relate to the droplet size and again time-lapsed photographic
data should enable examination of that issue.
7. Conclusions
These theoretical and experimental investigations into the
formation and release of blood droplets from oriﬁces and surfaces
have providedseveral signiﬁcant conclusions that potentiallyenhance
the interpretation of blood evidence from weapon tips encountered in
casework. For passive release under gravity, theoretical models based
on the pendent drop weight and shape methods have been shown to
predict detached droplet volumes from non-wetted oriﬁces, under
radius-limited conditions, to a good degree of accuracy. When the
conical tips are pre-wetted with blood the contact angle made by the
pendent droplet with the tip surface becomes a crucial factor in
determining the detached droplet volume. This volume is found to be
independent of whetherthe blood ﬂows from an oriﬁce ontothe tip or
over the conical tip surface itself in the case of un-bored nozzles. Here
the droplets are held on to the tip surface by the surface tension force
and are said to be angle-limited. Detached droplet volumes are
predicted fairly well by applying the contact angle correction factors
originally derived for ﬂat surfaces [33] to these conical tips. Droplet
volume increases with cone angle and, for a ﬂat horizontal surface, the
detached droplet volume corresponds very well to theoretical
predictions with a value of around 150 mL for the experimental
conditions in this work. Furthermore, these data suggest that for the
sharpest conical tips a lower droplet volume of around 20–30 mL is
likely. The degree of wettingof theweapon tipwith blood and thewet-
ability of the surface itself, as well as the degree of sharpness of the tip,
are the key factors in determining the volume of released blood
droplets. These results provide quantitative data and theoretical
models to underpin these conclusions. Although this work was carried
out using deﬁbrinated horse blood, all the numerical results may be
converted to equivalent values for human blood using the appropriate
g=r factor.
The mathematical models used to predict passive release have
been modiﬁed to describe the active release of blood droplets
under conditions of swing cast-off by replacing the gravitational
acceleration with that arising from the centrifugal force. Using
published data, derived from a device designed to physically
simulate the cast-off process [12,16], it has been shown that both
the mathematical models considered here provide estimates of
detached droplet diameters that are in order of magnitude
agreement with those found experimentally. However, the model
which is based on a mechanism whereby the detaching droplet is
release directly from a blood mass on the weapon, shows excellent
functional agreement – d / v1 – with the published data. This
may be indicative of blood ligament formation prior to the droplet
release itself, as was observed experimentally [16]. Nevertheless,
further experimental and theoretical work remains to be done to
reﬁne our understanding of this aspect of blood droplet formation
and release.
Fig. 5. Plot of Ln d versus Ln v for published swing cast-off droplet data and for
theoretical models.
Table 6
Experimental values and theoretical predictions for cast-off droplet diameters.
Experiment 
Reference 
Theory
Tangential velocity v ms1
Droplet diameter d mm 
d (Eq. (8)) mm 
d (Eq. (9)) mm
4 
1.46 
[12] 
1.7 
2.6
6 
0.9 
[16] 
1.3 
1.7
10 
0.6 
[16] 
0.87 
1.0
15 
0.48 
[12] 
0.66 
0.70
20 
0.26 
[16] 
0.56 
0.52
30 
0.18 
[16] 
0.41 
0.35
10 
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934


--- PAGE 11 ---

Declarations of interest
None.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Craig D. Adam: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal
analysis, 
Investigation, 
Methodology, 
Project 
administration,
Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review & editing.
Acknowledgements
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
References
[1] S.Chandra, C.T.Avedisian, Onthecollisionof adropletwithasolid surface, Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. A 432 (1991) 13–41, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1991.0002.
[2] M. Pasandideh-Fard, Y.M. Qiao, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Capillary effects
during impact on a solid surface, Phys. Fluids 8 (3) (1996) 650–659, doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.868850.
[3] L. Hulse-Smith, N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, Deducing drop size and impact
velocity from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci. 50 (1) (2005) 1–10, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1520/JFS2003224.
[4] N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Formation of ﬁngers around the
edges of a drop hitting a metal plate with high velocity, J. Fluid Mech. 510
(2004) 353–373, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0022112004009310.
[5] L. Hulse-Smith, M. Illes, A blind trial evaluation of a crime scene methodology for
deducingimpactvelocityanddropletsizefromcircular bloodstains, J.Forensic Sci.
52 (1) (2007) 65–69, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2006.00298.x.
[6] C.D. Adam, Fundamental studies of bloodstain formation and characteristics,
Forensic Sci. Int. 219 (1) (2012) 76–87, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.for-
sciint.2011.12.002.
[7] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics
in blood stain pattern analysis: comparative review and research oppor-
tunities, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (1–3) (2013) 375–396, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.forsciint.2013.04.018.
[8] C.D. Adam, Experimental and theoretical studies of the spreading of
bloodstains on painted surfaces, Forensic Sci. Int. 229 (2013) 66–74, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2013.03.044.
[9] N. Laan, K.G. de Bruin, D. Bartolo, C. Josserand, D. Bonn, Maximum diameter of
impacting liquid droplets, Phys. Rev. Appl. 2 (4) (2014)044018, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.2.044018.
[10] C. Knock, M. Davison, Predicting the position of the source of blood stains for
angled impacts, J. Forensic Sci. 52 (5) (2007) 1044–1049, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.1556-4029.2007.00505.x.
[11] N. Laan, K.G. de Bruin, D. Slenter, J. Wilhelm, M. Jermy, D. Bonn, Bloodstain
pattern analysis: implementation of a ﬂuid dynamic model for position
determination of victims, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 11461, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/srep11461.
[12] N. Kabaliuk, M.C. Jermy, E.M.P. Williams, T.L. Laber, M.C. Taylor, Experimental
validation of a numerical model for predicting the trajectory of blood drops in
typical crime scene conditions, including droplet deformation and breakup,
with a study of the effect of indoor air currents and wind on typical spatter
drop trajectories, Forensic Sci. Int. 245 (2014) 107–120, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.forsciint.2014.10.020.
[13] C. Flight, M. Jones, K.N. Ballantyne, Determination of the maximum distance
blood spatter travels from a vertical impact, Forensic Sci. Int. 293 (2018) 27–36,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.10.015.
[14] S.N. Kunz, J. Adamec, C. Grove, Analyzing the dynamics and morphology of
cast-off pattern at different speed levels using high-speed digital video
imaging, J. Forensic Sci. 62 (2) (2017) 428–434, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
1556-4029.13299.
[15] D. Attinger, P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, K. De Brabanter, Determining the region
of origin of blood spatter patterns considering ﬂuid dynamics and statistical
uncertainties, Forensic Sci. Int. 298 (2019) 323–331, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.forsciint.2019.02.003.
[16] E. Williams, M. Taylor, The development and construction of a motorized blood
droplet generation device (BDGD) for detailed analysis of blood droplet
dynamics, J. Bloodstain Pattern Anal. 29 (1) (2013) 14–29.
[17] N. Kabaliuk, M.C. Jermy, K. Morison, T. Stotesbury, M.C. Taylor, E.M.P. Williams,
Blood drop size in passive dripping from weapons, Forensic Sci. Int. 228 (1–3)
(2013) 75–82, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2013.02.023.
[18] E.M.P. Williams, E.S. Graham, M.C. Jermy, D.C. Kieser, M.C. Taylor, The dynamics
of blood drop release from swinging objects in the creation of cast-off
bloodstain patterns, J. Forensic Sci. 64 (2) (2019) 413–421, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1556-4029.13855.
[19] S. Middleman, Modeling Axisymmetric Flows, Dynamics of Films, Jets and
Drops, Academic Press, San Diego, 1995.
[20] Lord Rayleigh, Investigations in capillarity, Philos. Mag. 48 (1899) 321–337,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786449908621342.
[21] W.D. Harkins, F.E.J. Brown, The determination of surface tension and the
weight of falling drops, Am. Chem. Soc. 4 (1919) 499–524, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/ja01461a003.
[22] Z.Q. Zhang, Y. Mori, Formulation of the Harkins-Brown correction factor for
drop-volume description, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 32 (1993) 2950–2952, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ie00023a070.
[23] J.C. Earnshaw, E.G. Johnson, B.J. Carroll, P.J. Doyle, The drop volume method for
interfacial tension determination: an error analysis, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 177
(1996) 150–155, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcis.1996.0015.
[24] B.-B. Lee, P. Ravindra, E.-S. Chan, A critical review: surface and interfacial
tension measurement by the drop weight method, Chem. Eng. Commun. 195
(2008) 889–924, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00986440801905056.
[25] O.E. Yildirim, Q. Xu, O.A. Basaran, Analysis of the drop weight method, Phys.
Fluids 17 (2005)062107, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1938227.
[26] J. Campbell, Surface tension measurement by the drop weight method, J. Phys.
D: Appl. Phys. 3 (1970) 1499–1504, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/
3/10/420.
[27] B.B. Freud, W.D. Harkins, The shapes of drops and the determination of surface
tension, J. Phys. Chem. 33 (8) (1929) 1217–1234, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
j150302a012.
[28] R.C. Brown, H. McCormick, A new drop-weight method for the comparison of
surface tensions, Philos. Mag. 39 (1948) 420–428, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/14786444808521691.
[29] C.E. Stauffer, The measurement of surface tension by the pendant drop
technique, J. Phys. Chem. 69 (6) (1965) 1933–1938, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1021/j100890a024.
[30] J.F. Padday, The proﬁles of axially symmetric menisci, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. 
A 
269 
(1197) 
(1971) 
265–293, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.1971.0031.
[31] J.F. Padday, A.R. Pitt, The stability of axisymmetric menisci, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. 
A 
275 
(1253) 
(1973) 
489–528, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.1973.0113.
[32] E.A. Boucher, M.J.B. Evans, Pendent drop proﬁles and related capillary
phenomena, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 346 (1646) (1975) 349–374, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1975.0180.
[33] E.A. Boucher, M.J.B. Evans, H.J. Kent, Capillary phenomena II: equilibrium and
stability of rotationally symmetric ﬂuid bodies, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 349 (1656)
(1976) 81–100, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1976.0061.
[34] S.R. Babu, Analysis of drop formation at conical tips: 1 theory, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 116 (2) (1987) 350–358, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9797
(87)90131-7.
[35] S.R. Babu, Analysis of drop formation at conical tips: 2 experimental, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 116 (2) (1987) 359–372, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9797
(87)90132-9.
[36] B.A.J. Larkin, C.E. Banks, Exploring the applicability of equine blood to
bloodstain pattern analysis, Med. Sci. Law 56 (3) (2016) 190–199, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1177/0025802414542456.
[37] G.W.C. Kaye, T.H. Laby, Tables of Physical and Chemical Constants, 16th ed.,
Longman, Harlow, 1995.
[38] S.H. James, P.E. Kish, T.P. Sutton, Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis —
Theory and Practice, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2005.
[39] A.R. Frost, Rotary atomisation in the ligament formation mode, J. Agric. Eng.
Res. 26 (1981) 63–78, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-8634(81)90127-X.
[40] J. Liu, Q. Yu, Q. Guo, Experimental investigation of liquid disintegration by
rotary cups, Chem. Eng. Sci. 73 (2012) 44–50, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2012.01.010.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 303 (2019) 109934 
11
