

--- PAGE 1 ---

Robust estimation for area of origin in bloodstain pattern analysis via directional
analysis
M. Illes *, M. Boue´
Trent University, Department of Forensic Science, Canada
1. Introduction
The estimation of a blood source origin is one of the most
essential pieces of evidence that can be extracted from a
bloodletting crime scene. When a force is applied to a blood
source, single bloodstains will ﬂy through the air until striking a
target surface. A bloodstain pattern area of origin is the three
dimensional location of that blood source. Estimating the location
by directional analysis consists of retracing the trajectories of a
group of selected (upward directional) bloodstains that originated
from this area. The trajectories are determined through trigono-
metric identities that relate the width and length of a stain (more
precisely, of an ellipse that is carefully ﬁtted to the stain) to the
impact angle of the droplet and to the glancing angle of the
bloodstain (the angle measured on the wall between the main axis
of the stain and the vertical) [1]. Once the trajectories emanating
from each stain have been retraced, obtaining the estimate of the
origin is a simple procedure. The x and y coordinates of the
estimate correspond to the arithmetic mean1 of the x and y
coordinates, respectively, of all the points on the x–y plane (the
top-view) where the retraced trajectories intersect (see Fig. 1).
When viewed from the side (on the x–z plane), and ﬁxing the x
coordinate of the origin, an upper limit for the z coordinate is
obtained as the mean of the z values of the trajectories at that ﬁxed
level of x (see Fig. 2).
The method of directional analysis as described above has been
well documented and validated in the literature (see [1–5] and the
references therein). Nevertheless, considering the sensitivity of the
mean to the presence of outliers, it is natural to ask whether the
method can be made more robust by modifying the averaging
procedure. In this paper we focus our attention on two robust
alternatives: the trimmed mean and a deterministic version of the
RANSAC algorithm. We analyze and compare the performance of
these statistics under two different settings. In the ﬁrst setting
(Case A), we consider impact patterns where all upward moving
stains have been measured, and we take random samples of size 20
from all of the stains. In this situation the variance of the
estimation is greatly reduced for all patterns when using the
trimmed mean, with a small improvement in accuracy. Moreover,
when stains were excluded from the samples according to the
criteria for stain selection identiﬁed in [2], the reduction in
variance was less pronounced in most cases, supporting the
conclusion that those criteria can indeed help identify stains which
affect the accuracy of the estimation negatively. We also study the
more realistic setting (Case B) where only a small set of stains has
been deliberately selected and measured by a bloodstain analyst
Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 8 May 2012
Received in revised form 15 January 2013
Accepted 25 January 2013
Available online 19 February 2013
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Impact pattern
Forensic science
Statistics
Directional analysis
Area of origin
A B S T R A C T
Directional analysis provides quantitative data supporting the three-dimensional estimation of the area of
origin for impact bloodstain pattern analysis. The ﬁnal stage of directional analysis consists of calculating
the point of origin via the arithmetic mean of top-view intersecting points and side-view heights of the
virtual trajectories of single stains within the impact pattern. Given the sensitivity of the mean to the
presence of outliers (droplets that have been inﬂuenced by gravitational force and aerodynamic drag), it is
natural to ask whether directional analysis can be made more robust by modifying the averaging
procedure. In this paper we focus our attention on two robust alternatives to the arithmetic mean: the
trimmed mean and a deterministic version of the RANSAC algorithm. Our results suggest that the trimmed
mean is a practical robust alternative to the arithmetic mean, whereas the deterministic RANSAC procedure
is not. Since there can be no guarantee that stain selection can be free of outliers, the trimmed mean can be
used as an aide in their detection. Moreover, our analysis reveals that the trimmed mean can also be used to
detect outliers among the points of intersection of trajectories. Outliers of this type occur as the intersection
points of trajectories emanating from stains with nearly vertical paths.
 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author at: Department of Forensic Science, Trent University,
1600 West Bank Drive, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada K9L 1Z7.
Tel.: +1 705 748 1011x7227; fax: +1 705 748 1003.
E-mail address: mikeilles@trentu.ca (M. Illes).
1 Henceforth we refer to the arithmetic mean simply as the mean.
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/fo r sc iin t
0379-0738/$ – see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2013.01.030


--- PAGE 2 ---

following standard selection procedures [2,3]. In this case we
obtain no signiﬁcant difference in the mean errors of estimation
resulting from all three methods.
2. Methodology
2.1. Blood stain pattern data
The data used in this paper are from impact patterns created
within a laboratory environment for past experiments, so that the
true location of the source is known for each pattern. In Case A
(patterns labeled as A1–A5 here), the data used were originally
created and collected for analysis in [2]. Data for Case B (patterns
labeled as B1–13 here) were originally created and collected for
analysis in [4,5] and other similar research projects. The reader is
referred to those papers for details in the methodology for pattern
creation in each case. In each setting, information for all stains used
here was initially collected and stored using BackTrack/WinTM and
BackTrack/ImagesTM. Using those packages, we obtained informa-
tion on the retraced trajectories for all stains. After storing all the
Fig. 1. Intersection of trajectories using Back TrackTM top-view.
Fig. 2. Estimation of z using Back TrackTM side-view.
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229
224


--- PAGE 3 ---

retraced trajectories in the appropriate format, we then performed
all our calculations using the statistical language R [6].
2.2. Methods of estimation
The following three methods for computing the source of origin
from the retraced trajectories will be compared. In what follows,
we denote the estimated source of origin as CP = (CPx,CPy,CPz). We
recall that CPz represents an upper bound for the true z coordinate.
1. Arithmetic mean. This method corresponds to the basic top-
view/side-view directional analysis procedure described in the
introduction. Here the x and y components of all crossing points
of trajectories on the x–y plane are averaged (component by
component) to obtain CPx and CPy. Then CPz is calculated as the
mean on the x–z plane (the side view) of the z values on the
projected trajectories at x = CPx.
2. Trimmed mean. We consider the same top-view/side-view
directional analysis as in (1), but in both steps we use the
trimmed mean for averaging the coordinates. A trimmed mean
is computed by removing a percentage of the largest and
smallest observations and averaging the values that remain. In
contrast with the arithmetic mean, it is a measure of central
tendency that is robust in the presence of outliers. The results
presented here use a trimming percentage of 10%. We note that
we also used the 20% trimmed mean, with very similar results to
those discussed here.
3. A deterministic version of RANSAC. The RANSAC2 algorithm is a
method of parameter estimation in the presence of outliers
developed and used for problems in computer vision. Its use for
bloodstain pattern analysis was introduced in [7], where they
use computer vision methods (namely, multiple-view geome-
try) as a different approach to source of origin estimation. Here
we discuss the use of a RANSAC-like algorithm when estimating
the source via directional analysis. Because in this context the
number of stains used by the analyst is typically small, the usual
random sampling and termination rule are not necessary, and
the algorithm is greatly simpliﬁed, resulting in a deterministic
version which performs a ﬁxed number of operations. This can
be done efﬁciently using R.3 The algorithm we consider is the
following:
i. Fix a value d > 0 (called the distance threshold).
ii. Repeat i) and ii) below for every pair of intersecting trajectories
(two is the minimal number of trajectories required to make an
estimate):
i. Estimate 
the 
source 
of 
origin 
CP 
from 
the 
top-view
intersection of the two trajectories, together with the
average of the z coordinates of the pair of lines at the
intersection.
ii. Select the elements from the entire set of trajectories whose
distance from the trajectory to CP is less than d (these
elements form the consensus set CS for this pair, and are
considered ‘‘inliers’’).
iii. The CS with the largest number of inliers is selected as optimal,
and the source is recomputed using all the trajectories in the CS.
In the presence of ties, the optimal CS is taken at random from
all the tied CSs.
The distance threshold considered in this paper is d = 2 (chosen
arbitrarily as a value that is neither too large nor too small). Values
of d = 1, 2.5, and 3 were also considered, with very similar results. A
modiﬁcation where the distance threshold is allowed to vary is
discussed below.
2.3. Procedure
Case A: random samples. For each one of the ﬁve impact patterns
A1–A5, a ﬁrst set of 10,000 random samples of size 20 was selected
from all available stains for that pattern, with 10 stains taken from
each side of the pattern. The same sample was used to estimate the
source via the three methods listed in Section 2.2. A second set of
10,000 random samples from each pattern was also selected. Stains
qualifying as undesirable according to the outlier and zone criteria
outlined in [2] were not included in this second set of samples.
Once again, the source was estimated via the three methods using
the same sample. The error of each estimate was calculated as the
Euclidean distance between the known source of origin and the
estimated source of origin. We note that henceforth we will refer to
the second set of samples as the set with no outliers, with the clear
understanding that some outliers are still present in the data set,
except that these have not been identiﬁed a priori by us as obvious
outliers or undesirable stains using the criteria stated in [2].
Case B: samples selected by bloodstain analysts. For each one of
the thirteen selected sets of stains from patterns B1–B13, the
source was estimated via the three methods listed in Section 2.2
and the error of the estimation was calculated.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Case A: random samples.
Table 1 allows us to compare the variability in estimation for
patterns A1–A5 for the three methods considered. The variable
being plotted and summarized is the error of the estimates (the
Euclidean distance between the known source of origin and the
estimated one). A visual examination of the boxplots in the ﬁrst
column indicates that the trimmed mean is the measure that is
most robust to the presence of outliers, producing estimates with
the smallest variation and smallest maximum error for all patterns.
The reduction in variability is less pronounced when stains
identiﬁed as outliers are not included in the samples, which further
supports the use of those criteria for the identiﬁcation of
undesirable stains. Although the Ransac procedure also reduces
variability and maximum error in some cases, it does not perform
well consistently, as can be seen in the boxplots for patterns A3–
A5, and therefore we do not consider it further as a satisfactory
robust alternative.
The maximum errors and variability are quantiﬁed in the
second column of the table. The trimmed mean has the smallest
standard deviation and the smallest maximum error for all
patterns. The largest difference is observed for pattern A4 with
all stains, where the standard deviation using the arithmetic mean
is sixteen times larger than when using the trimmed mean
(between 15.7 and 16.3 times larger, with 95% conﬁdence), and the
maximum error is reduced from 517 cm to 12 cm. The smallest
improvement is for pattern A1 after outliers have been removed,
and yet the standard deviation for the arithmetic mean is still
signiﬁcantly larger at 1.28 times that of the trimmed mean
(between 1.25 and 1.30 times larger, with 95% conﬁdence),
although with no improvement on maximum error. We remark
that although the error of estimation is known to increase as the
true distance to the wall increases, we did not observe a
relationship between the magnitude of improvement in standard
deviation and the true distance to the wall.
When taking all patterns and samples into account, we found
that the trimmed mean also improves the average error of
estimation slightly. An average improvement of 2.8 cm is obtained
when sampling from all stains ((2.6, 2.9) with 95% conﬁdence), and
an average improvement of 2.3 cm is obtained after removing
obvious outliers ((2.1, 2.4) with 95% conﬁdence). Although this
2 RANSAC stands for RANdom Sample and Consensus algorithm.
3 For a complete discussion of RANSAC, the reader is referred to [8].
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229 
225


--- PAGE 4 ---

Table 1
Summary of variability and maximum error in estimation for Case A.
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229
226


--- PAGE 5 ---

improvement does not seem important when averaging through
all patterns and samples, its real importance comes to light when
examining each pattern separately (pairing sample by sample), as
we now discuss.
Table 
2 
summarizes 
the 
results 
when 
comparing 
the
estimations using the arithmetic mean and those using the
trimmed mean, paired sample by sample. The variable being
summarized is the difference between the error of estimation
using the mean minus the error of estimation using the trimmed
mean based on the same set of stains. The fact that the median
differences are either negative or very close to zero reveals that
in about half the samples the trimmed mean actually increases
the error of the estimation: when no real outliers are present,
‘‘good’’ stains are removed from the sample and this smaller
sample results in a loss of accuracy. The largest loss is for
pattern A5, with a difference of 12.5 cm. Being the pattern that is
farthest from the wall (x = 43.1), estimation with fewer stains
affects this pattern the most.
Nevertheless, even the biggest loss in accuracy is not very large,
especially when compared to the large improvements observed in
the presence of outliers. Careful examination of the sets of stains
where these huge differences took place allows us to understand
the reason behind those differences.
On the one hand, the presence of a single stain that is an
extreme outlier can affect the estimation dramatically. Exactly
how it is that an outlier affects the estimation can be seen in Fig. 3,
where ﬁve stains taken from pattern A1, together with their
retraced trajectories, are viewed on the y–z plane. Stain 5 stands
out as a clear outlier, resulting in a trajectory pointing in a
completely different direction than the rest. A blood stain analyst
adhering to accepted practices would discard such a stain from
any estimation (it is in fact one of the stains discarded for the
second set of samples from that pattern). The fact that discarding
that stain is the right choice is made apparent by the sampling
results of this pattern: every sample where the trimmed mean
improved the estimation in more than 20 cm included this
particular stain.
On the other hand, our analysis revealed that the trimmed
mean can also improve the estimation dramatically when
outliers occur, not among stains, but among points of intersec-
tion of trajectories. These outliers happen in patterns where at
least two stains with nearly vertical paths (one on each side of
the pattern) are present. When two stains have very similar
gamma angles, both pointing straight down through the y–z
center, the intersection of their retraced trajectories is a point
completely apart from all other intersections. When taking the
mean, this point pulls the estimation away from the true source
of origin.
As an extreme example we examine the worst sets of stains
from pattern A5, all of which include the same two stains: stain 36
and stain 152. There are some reasons to consider stain 36 as a
possible outlier, but we found no reason to regard stain 152 as one.
Indeed, this is a situation where the problem is not caused by a
single stain; the problem arises from the presence of both stains
together. In particular, stains 36 and 152 have nearly vertical paths
(with gamma angles of 354 and 358 degrees, respectively), so that
the intersection of their retraced trajectories is a point completely
away from all other intersections (x = 4397, y = 124, z = 3482).
The resulting estimate for area of origin includes a value of
CPx = 33, which would clearly be deemed absurd by any blood
stain analyst, calling for further exploration of the data. However,
for less extreme cases where the estimate is inaccurate but does
not stand out as absurd, the phenomenon can be detected by the
use of the trimmed mean.
3.2. Case B: samples selected by bloodstain analysts
We have seen that when considering random samples of stains,
the trimmed mean performs better than both the arithmetic mean
and the Ransac method when estimating source of origin via
directional analysis. Be that as it may, we also need to analyze how
the methods compare when the stains have been chosen with care
by a bloodstain analyst, since that is how estimations are done in
practice. Patterns B1–B13 are used for that purpose, and the results
can be found in Table 3. With a single sample from each pattern,
the only comparison that is possible here is the one between the
average errors of estimation for each method. Note that the
average error obtained with the Ransac method is larger than that
of the mean, and that there is practically no difference between the
average errors obtained for the mean and the trimmed mean. In
fact, after adjusting for the effect of the true horizontal distance
from the source to the wall (taking into account that the error of
the estimation increases as the distance to the wall increases), we
found no signiﬁcant difference between the mean true errors for all
three methods (P > 0.2).
We also evaluated the performance of another variation of the
Ransac method – one that uses a criterion for ﬁnding the optimal
consensus set (CS) that could not be applied earlier in the context
of thousands of samples. This second criterion is often employed in
cluster analysis when trying to ﬁnd the natural number of clusters
in a data set [9], and it involves looking for the number of clusters
at which there is a knee, peak or dip in the plot of the evaluation
measure against the number of clusters (here we use the sum of
squared errors (SSE) as the evaluation measure). More precisely,
instead of ﬁxing a distance threshold arbitrarily, different values of
the distance threshold are considered, and the size of the largest
consensus set for each value is plotted against the SSE obtained
from the estimation using that set. The optimal CS is then chosen as
that one where there is a knee, peak or dip in the plot. When there
is more than one CS to choose from, one can either pick the one
with the lowest SSE, or obtain the estimate as the average of the
estimates from all the candidate consensus sets.
Table 2
Summary for differences between error of estimation using the mean minus error of estimation using the trimmed mean for the same sample.
Pattern 
Min. 
Median 
Mean 
Max. 
True x
All Stains 
A1 
8.4 
0.99 
0.69 
78.2 
25.9
A2 
6.3 
0.26 
0.36 
47.3 
17.8
A3 
5.8 
0.39 
5.3 
115.5 
34.2
A4 
6.0 
0.14 
6.76 
515.6 
27.7
A5 
12.5 
1.42 
2.15 
131.6 
43.1
No outliers 
A1 
6.8 
0.60 
0.83 
6.22 
25.9
A2 
5.1 
0.16 
0.53 
12.4 
17.8
A3 
5.7 
0.03 
6.89 
272.1 
34.2
A4 
6.0 
0.23 
4.81 
149 
27.7
A5 
10.7 
1.23 
0.037 
81.6 
43.1
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229 
227


--- PAGE 6 ---

As an example, let us consider impact pattern B13 (a pattern
with 20 stains). We obtained different estimations for the origin
using a distance threshold varying from 10 cm (the CS is the
complete set) to 1.6 cm (the CS has only 10 trajectories), calculating
the SSE for each estimation. The plot of the cardinality of the
consensus set against the SSE is found in Fig. 4. We observe a knee
when the CS size is 17, so we pick that consensus set as the optimal
one, and base our ﬁnal estimation on it (clearly, the observation of a
knee in the plot is highly subjective). With an error of only 0.6 cm,
the estimation is in fact better than the original estimation (with
error of 3.8 cm) and better than the trimmed mean estimation (with
error of 2.6 cm). Unfortunately, the improvements using this
technique were not consistent throughout the patterns. The lack
of consistency, together with the extra computational burden of the
method, disqualiﬁes Ransac as a robust alternative to the standard
directional analysis estimation using the mean. Although we do not
see it as a practical alternative, Ransac has allowed us to conﬁrm that
a small number of well-selected stains can give a very accurate
estimation of the source of origin.
4. Conclusions
From the calculations in Case A, we found that in the context of
the source of origin estimation via directional analysis, the
trimmed mean is a robust alternative to the arithmetic mean,
whereas the Ransac method is not. Yet when applied to thirteen
sets of stains that have been selected from a pattern by bloodstain
analysts (Case B), the trimmed mean provided neither signiﬁcant
nor practical improvement in the estimation. This lack of
improvement is a reﬂection of the absence of outliers in those
sets of stains: when an analyst selects stains adhering to standard
practices in the ﬁeld (upward directional stains), extreme outliers
are rare, so that among thirteen sets of stains we did not observe a
single one. Since there is no guarantee that every selection can be
Fig. 3. Stain 5 stands out as a clear outlier among nearby stains.
Table 3
Comparison of errors for Case B.
Pattern 
Mean 
Trim 
Ransac
B1 
13.23 
14.1 
15.22
B2 
10.46 
10.03 
7.68
B3 
11.77 
12.65 
9.55
B4 
2.66 
2.57 
3.49
B5 
10.95 
10.75 
17.45
B6 
8.87 
9.19 
7.22
B7 
5.07 
5.12 
4.53
B8 
15.31 
14.38 
19.2
B9 
3.84 
3.38 
3.29
B10 
8.45 
8.43 
11.06
B11 
5.01 
5.47 
8.0
B12 
22.44 
23.13 
28.87
B13 
3.82 
2.56 
0.38
Average 
9.37 
9.36 
10.46
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20
5
10
15
20
25
Ransac
 
 patt ern B13
CS size
SSE
Fig. 4. SSE for consensus sets of different sizes.
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229
228


--- PAGE 7 ---

free of outliers, particularly in more complex pattern analysis,
such as the use of multiple surfaces, the trimmed mean can be
used as an aide in the detection of outliers4. Indeed, a large
difference between the estimation using the mean and that one
using the trimmed mean can alert the analyst to the possible
presence of an outlier (be it as a single stain or as an intersection
point), calling for a closer examination of the data. If no strong
reason for discarding a stain or an intersection point as outliers is
found, then all stains and intersection points should be used and
the estimation differences should be taken as an indication of the
large variability in the data, so that caution must be exercised
when interpreting results.
The results presented here are relevant to the forensic
scientiﬁc community by way of validation of methods. Recent
publications and court cases have challenged the robustness,
validity, accuracy and reliability of many disciplines within the
ﬁeld 
of 
forensic 
science 
[10]. 
The 
statistical 
comparison
of the methods for calculating a point for area of origin
estimation supports the robustness of directional analysis and
highlights the importance of stain selection in the process of
estimation.
References
[1] A.L. Carter, The directional analysis of bloodstain patterns: theory and experi-
mental validation, Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. J. 34 (2001) 173–189.
[2] M. Illes, M. Boue´, Investigation of a model for stain selection in bloodstain pattern
analysis, Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. J. 44 (2011) 1–12.
[3] J.K. Wells, Investigation of Factors Affecting the Region of Origin Estimate in Blood-
stain Pattern Analysis, M.Sc. Thesis, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, 2006.
[4] A.L. Carter, Further validation of the BackTrackTM computer program for blood-
stain pattern analysis – precision and accuracy, Int. Assoc. Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts News 21 (2005) 15–22.
[5] A.L. Carter, J. Forsythe-Erman, V. Hawkes, M. Illes, P. Laturnus, G. Lefebvre, B.
Yamashita, Validation of the BackTrackTM suite of programs for bloodstain pattern
analysis, J. Forensic Iden. 56 (2006) 242–254.
[6] R Development Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2011, ISBN
3-900051-07-0, http://www.R-project.org.
[7] J. Wright, A. Wagner, S. Rao, Y. Ma, Homography from coplanar ellipses with
application to forensic blood splatter reconstruction, 2006, in: IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2006, 1250–1257.
[8] M. Fischler, R. Bolles, Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model ﬁtting
with applications to image analysis and automated cartography, CACM 24 (1981)
381–395.
[9] P. Tan, M. Steinbach, V. Kumar, Data Mining, Pearson Education Inc., Boston, MA, 2006
.
[10] NAS, Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward,
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, 2009, S-16.
4 Although the trimmed mean is not programmed directly in BackTrackTM, it is
easy to select the most extreme trajectory crossings manually from the top-view
and discard them from the estimation.
M. Illes, M. Boue´ / Forensic Science International 226 (2013) 223–229 
229
