

--- PAGE 1 ---

Fundamental studies of bloodstain formation and characteristics
Craig D. Adam *
Faulds Laboratories, Department of Chemical and Forensic Sciences, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire ST5 5BG, UK
1. Introduction
A 
detailed 
understanding 
of 
blood 
dynamics 
and 
stain
formation is an essential prerequisite to the interpretation of
both individual bloodstains and spatter patterns. Within the
literature there is a fairly large body of work on both the spreading
of liquids following droplet impact and on the splash features that
may also be formed in those circumstances. In only a few notable
cases has blood been the subject of such study and the forensic
context been considered. Consequently there is a need, not only for
a review of recent theoretical developments relevant to blood
dynamics, but also for a systematic study of bloodstain formation
and the application of current theories to model and hence
understand the key characteristics of such stains. The work to be
described here aims to examine the stains formed following the
impact on paper of blood droplets in the millimetre size range and
travelling at a variety of angles and velocities. The spreading and
splash features are then interpreted following a review of
theoretical models and some conclusions drawn as to how such
an understanding may beneﬁt the examination of bloodstains in
the forensic context.
2. A review of the modelling of spreading and splash
The fundamental problem of explaining and predicting the
spread of liquid following perpendicular impact on a smooth
horizontal surface has received much attention in the literature;
for example, see the review in Ref. [1]. The development of
mathematical 
models 
has 
progressed 
alongside 
high 
speed
imaging experiments which reveal the mechanisms whereby the
impact of a spherical droplet leads to a circular, disc-shaped stain
[2]. These show that the impact creates a lamella or boundary layer
of liquid in contact with the surface which spreads rapidly in a
radial direction while the majority of the droplet remains
spherical. This stage is followed by the rim of the lamella swelling
as liquid ﬂows outward from the spherical reserve to create a
largely-ﬂat, disc-like entity with a swollen rim. The material within
the rim may then recede inwards until equilibrium is attained. On
surfaces of low wettability this means that the diameter of the ﬁnal
stain is likely to be less than that attained during the spreading
phase. On the other hand, where there are surface-speciﬁc forces
that enhance wetting 
and are 
independent of the 
impact
conditions, the ﬁnal stain diameter can be greater than that
generated after the maximum spreading has occurred. Images of
these stages are given, for example, in Ref. [2]. Although detail of
these processes depends on a number of factors which include the
nature of the surface and properties of the liquid, the formation
Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 24 August 2011
Received in revised form 20 November 2011
Accepted 12 December 2011
Available online 5 January 2012
Keywords:
Forensic
Bloodstain
Blood dynamics
Blood splash
Blood spatter
A B S T R A C T
A detailed understanding of blood droplet impact dynamics and stain formation is an essential
prerequisite to the interpretation of both individual bloodstains and spatter patterns. The current
literature on theoretical models for the spreading and splashing of liquid drops on surfaces relevant to the
forensic context of bloodstain formation has been reviewed. These models have been evaluated for a
paper substrate using experimental data obtained as function of droplet size, impact velocity and angle. It
is shown that for perpendicular impact there are fairly simple mathematical models for the spreading
diameter and the number of scallops or spines formed around the stain though these have quite limited
ranges of validity in their basic form. In particular, predictions for the diameter are best for small droplets
impacting at high velocity and the number of spines saturates for higher impact velocities. In the case of
spreading, a modiﬁcation to the energy conservation model is found to provide excellent agreement with
experimental stain diameters across a wide range of impact velocities. For non-perpendicular impact, the
width of stains is found to depend principally on the normal component of impact velocity and may be
predicted by an appropriate modiﬁcation to the expression for the perpendicular case. Limitations in the
calculation of impact angle from the stain aspect ratio are identiﬁed and a theoretical basis for the
prediction of spines around an elliptical stain is proposed. Some key issues for future research are
identiﬁed which include a systematic, quantitative study of the effect of surface properties on bloodstain
formation.
 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Tel.: +44 1782 733854; fax: +44 1782 712378.
E-mail address: c.d.adam@keele.ac.uk.
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/fo r sc iin t
0379-0738/$ – see front matter  2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.forsciint.2011.12.002


--- PAGE 2 ---

and dynamics of the lamella remains the key to understanding the
ﬁnal size of the stain. It should be acknowledged that, although
blood is a non-Newtonian ﬂuid, all studies to date have assumed it
behaves as if its viscosity were constant throughout the spreading
and splashing process and this approximation has also been
adopted in this work.
The models that have been developed to explain these effects
are based on fundamental physical processes adapted in some
cases with empirical factors so as to best describe observations on a
wide variety of liquids and droplet size, impacting over a range of
impact velocities. For the present purposes however, attention will
focus on those models that predict the behaviour of a low viscosity
ﬂuid such as blood impacting as droplets of diameter the order of a
millimetre. It is also preferable that the model has the minimum
empirical adjustment and that is justiﬁed according to some
physical origin.
2.1. Modelling spread following perpendicular impact
The spreading of liquid droplets following perpendicular
impact appears a simple process but is one that has and
continues to be subject to on-going study. Nevertheless, one of
the simplest and most successful models is that of Pasandideh-
Fard et al. [3] which is based on energy conservation consider-
ations originally proposed by Chandra and Avedisian [2]. This
equates the sum of the initial kinetic energy of the falling droplet
(KE1) together with its surface energy (SE1) to the sum of the ﬁnal
surface energy of the circular stain (SE2) and the energy
dissipated in the viscous deformation of the liquid on spreading
(W). Thus from [3]:
KE1 þ SE1 ¼ SE2 þ W
1
2
prd3
6
  
!
v2 þ pgd2 ¼ pgD2
4
ð1  cos ueÞ þ
p
3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Re
p
rv2dD2
(1)
In this expression a droplet of diameter d gives rise to a stain of
maximum spreading diameter D following impact at velocity v. The
relevant properties of the liquid are the density r, the viscosity h
and the surface tension g while the equilibrium contact angle of
the liquid with the surface is given by ue. The dimensionless
Reynolds number Re relating some of these quantities is given by:
Re ¼ rvd
h
The last term in Eq. (1) is both the most important and the most
difﬁcult to determine so approximations have to be made, in
particular with respect to the thickness of the expanding lamella. It
is this aspect that authors have differed in their approaches (e.g.
[2], [3]). The ﬁnal result is often expressed as the ratio b of the
maximum spreading diameter D to that of the droplet d. Thus from
Eq. (1) we get:
b ¼ D
d ¼
We þ 12
3ð1  cos ueÞ þ 4WeRe1=2
 
1=2
(2)
Here, the dimensionless Weber number We is deﬁned as:
We ¼ rv2d
g
Since the main mechanism for the spread of larger droplets
impacting at higher velocities is conversion of kinetic energy to
viscous deformation in forming the stain, both surface energy
terms may be neglected in these circumstances to give a simpliﬁed
version of Eq. (2) [3]:
b ¼ D
d ¼ 1
2 Re1=4
(3)
It should be noted that while Eq. (2) implies that stain size
reduces to the realistic scenario of a constant value as the impact
velocity deceases to zero, this is not the case for Eq. (3), implying
that is has a lower limit on its validity. By viewing Eq. (3) as a
limiting form of Eq. (2) shows that while surface tension has some
signiﬁcance in deﬁning the spread of a bloodstain at low impact
velocities, this factor is of little relevance at the higher velocities
typical of most stains found in casework. In the form of Eq. (3), the
model has been applied previously [4] to explain the diameters of
bloodstains formed on a variety of non-porous surfaces. The
variation in stain size ascribed to differences in surface roughness
was small but distinct. Nevertheless in all cases this simple model
gave approximate agreement with experimental data obtained
over a limited number and range of impact velocities though no
correction for air resistance was applied. By including an empirical
correction factor of 1.11 the model was adjusted to the mean
behaviour across all four surfaces in this work. However, as the
comparison between theory and experiment was not displayed
using the linear relationship of Eq. (3), systematic differences
between the model and the data were not discussed.
This energy conservation model (Eq. (2)) has been compared
against other models [5] and reﬁned further to provide an albeit
small correction for the fact that the spreading lamella is not
strictly cylindrical and that consequently the thickness of the rim
needed to be revised to more correctly model the surface energy of
the stain. The equilibrium contact angle ue was also replaced by the
advancing contact angle ua to provide an additional, minor
correction. This is of little signiﬁcance except at very low impact
velocities and in this work the value of the equilibrium contact
angle has been used where necessary. The resulting energy balance
equation may be now written as:
ðWe þ 12Þb ¼ 8 þ b3 3ð1  cos uaÞ þ
4ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Re
p
We
 

(4)
More recently [6] further experimental measurements have
validated this model against liquids with a range of viscosities and
the importance of this correction veriﬁed. Although both these
modiﬁcations have greatest impact at lower impact velocities,
their relevance to the spreading of bloodstains has not yet been
assessed. The models represented by Eqs. (2)–(4) are described
graphically for blood in Fig. 1. The abscissa is taken as the non-
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
beta (= D/d)
Re1/4
Liming fo
 
rm for high
 
We (Eq
 
n 3)
P-F mo
 
del (Eq
 
n 2)
P-F with U-K
 
correcon (Eq
 
n 4)
Fig. 1. Basic models for the spreading diameter of a circular blood-stain.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
77


--- PAGE 3 ---

dimensional parameter Re1/4 as this presents Eq. (3) in a linear
fashion and the other two as deviations from that linearity. The
range of this graph goes from a vanishingly small impact velocity to
that approaching a 2 m drop under gravity. The more parame-
terised models (Eqs. (2) and (4)) imply that stains should have sizes
less than that predicted by Eq. (3) and that the relationship
between b and Re1/4 deviates from linearity except at the highest
velocities.
It should be noted that there are other models for spreading that
have been successfully validated by experimental measurement;
some of these are reviewed in Ref. [6]. Many do depend however on
constants which are found empirically. The models shown in Fig. 1
have both the advantage of mathematical simplicity and limited
empirical adjustment.
2.2. Modelling splash following perpendicular impact
The generic term splash is usually applied to those features
around the circumference of a stain where thin ﬁngers or spines of
liquid are thrown outward beyond the rim to give a crown-like
appearance sometimes termed corona splash. In general splash
features are associated with higher impact velocities. However at
lower speeds the circumference may assume a wave-like appear-
ance (often termed scalloped) similar to splash but where no liquid
is ejected from the main body of the stain. Interestingly, in
reviewing previously published work it appears that this distinc-
tion does not seem to have been addressed as relevant to
theoretical models of splashing. Finally, at the lowest impact
velocities stains from perpendicular impact have a smooth circular
rim. The condition that marks the transition to splash features on
the stain may be mathematically deﬁned and is termed the splash
threshold [7]. This is based on empirical data which show
correlation with surface roughness measurements so would not
necessarily transfer across to other surface characteristics that
might suppress splashing such as elasticity.
The origin of both spine and scallop features (Fig. 2) has
generally assumed to be due to Rayleigh–Taylor instability in the
ﬂuid ﬂow due to the rapid deceleration of the liquid on hitting the
lower density air around the stain [8]. This causes wave-like
undulations around the circumference with a wavelength depen-
dant on the deceleration, surface tension and density of the liquid.
Hence the number of scallops or spines observed will depend on
how many wavelengths ﬁt around the rim of a particular diameter
of stain. Such arguments were presented [9] to show that these
may be predicted using:
N ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
WeRe1=2
48
r
(5)
The form of this equation appears to support – through the
factor WeRe1/2 – the much earlier empirical result [7] which
attempted to predict whether splashing will take place for a
particular liquid impacting on a surface under speciﬁc conditions.
Here the splashing threshold is given by [7]:
WeRe1=2 > K 
(6)
where K is characteristic of a particular surface and has been
shown to correlate well with roughness. Note that strictly Ref. [7]
gives the square of this expression (We2Re) as the threshold and
indeed some authors have used the square root as the criterion! All
these are equivalent though the absolute values of K will differ in
each case. The combination of these two Eqs. (5) and (6) appears to
suggest that for a particular surface there will be a minimum
number of spines observable around any stain. Despite the form of
Eq. (5), it has been shown [10] that better agreement with
experimental data is given by:
N ¼ 1:14We1=2
(7)
where the factor of 1.14 was empirically derived to produce the
best agreement with experimental results. Splash features around
bloodstains have been shown [4] to follow Eq. (7) to some extent
with the factor further modiﬁed to be more or less unity. However
deviations from this model could not be identiﬁed as the data were
not presented in a linear fashion. In a subsequent publication [11]
it was shown how measurements on stain size interpreted using
Eq. (3) could be combined with this interpretation of splash
features (Eq. (7)) to derive estimates for both the impact velocity
and size of a blood droplet. This provides a potentially powerful
tool in bloodstain interpretation.
The implication of these results is that until the impact
conditions – principally a sufﬁciently high velocity – satisfy Eq. (6),
true splash will not be observed. However, at lower impact speeds,
scallops or a smooth edge will be the outcome. Whenever such
features are observed, their number is best predicted by Eq. (7)
[10]. More recently [12] it has been suggested that there are two
possible mechanisms for splash. So-called corona splash is driven
by the impact on the air around the stain and predominates on
smooth surfaces. However, the dependence of this mechanism on
air pressure throws doubt on the validity of the Rayleigh–Taylor
mechanism which is driven by the density difference between the
liquid and the surrounding air, in favour of the Kelvin–Helmholtz
mechanism which depends on corresponding velocity difference.
Fig. 2. Examples of scallop (top) and spine (bottom) features on bloodstains arising
from a 4.21 mm diameter droplet impacting perpendicularly on to paper.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
78


--- PAGE 4 ---

On rougher surfaces so-called prompt splash may result which
depends on the texture of the surface. In general both mechanisms
are likely to be present to varying degrees and this may reduce the
transferability of Eq. (7) across a wide range of surfaces.
Finally, brief attention will be given to the effect of the
characteristics and properties of the surface itself on spreading and
splashing behaviour. In addition to roughness which has been the
subject 
of 
most 
attention 
in 
the 
literature, 
the 
elasticity,
wettability and porosity of the surface are likely to be signiﬁcant
factors in cases where the surface is not a relatively smooth, rigid
and non-porous substrate [6].
Although it does not appear to have a very signiﬁcant effect on
spreading [1,4], surface roughness is recognised as a factor in
determining the splashing threshold. This is particularly the case
for low levels of roughness where an increase in roughness reduces
the splashing threshold and thereby promotes splashing. Con-
versely a highly polished surface will suppress such phenomena by
increasing the threshold [1]. These qualitative links between
surface texture and splash features have long been recognised
within the forensic context. Porosity in the surface will encourage
dissipation of energy through the removal of liquid from the stain.
The elasticity of the surface has been found to affect the splashing
threshold [13]. While a rigid surface has a fairly low threshold this
increases as the elasticity increases since more of the energy on
impact is taken up as elastic energy in the surface.
2.3. Non-perpendicular impact
In contrast to perpendicular impact, studies of the dynamics of
liquid droplets impacting on an inclined surface are far fewer in
number and consequently fundamental aspects of the formation of
stain characteristics are more poorly understood. Bloodstains
resulting from angular impact are considerably more complex in
appearance than those just discussed. They show distinct variation
in shape, size and splash features with respect to impact conditions
(Fig. 3).
It was shown some time ago that the basic shape of the stain is
predominantly elliptical though this may show some elongation in
the forward direction. Measurement of the axial ratio (W/L) leads
to a good estimate of the impact angle u, conventionally measured
from the surface, according to the accepted formula:
sin u ¼ W
L
(8)
A commentary on this early work has recently been published
[14]. Although it appears that this formula works satisfactorily in
practice and is justiﬁed to some extent on geometric grounds,
surprisingly there is no published detailed analysis of its reliability
across a full angular and impact velocity range. A semi-quantita-
tive study using high speed photography discussed some of the
characteristics of such stains and in particular has veriﬁed that
impact on an inclined surface produces similar stain features to
those found following perpendicular impact onto a moving
substrate [15].
Most interest in recent years has centred around the splashing
of droplets on inclined surfaces often using moving belts or
rotating cylinders to generate the necessary tangential velocity
component. Once again high speed photography has been used to
investigate the mechanisms underpinning these phenomena. In
particular, it has been shown that the normal component vn
(vn = v sin u) of impact velocity and hence the corresponding Ren
and Wen numbers, determine the formation of splash features
[16,17]. Hence, following the work of Ref. [10], the basis of an
expression for the number of spines will be:
N ¼ 1:14We1=2
n
¼ 1:14We1=2 sin u 
(9)
This shows that as the impact angle is decreased the maximum
number of spines produced will be reduced. It also appears
reasonable that the transverse spreading of the stain which should
be largely unaffected by the impact angle also depends on vn and
hence the elliptical stain width W would be given by modifying
Eqs. (1)–(3) appropriately, for example:
W ¼ d
2 Re1=4
n
¼ d
2 Re1=4 sin1=4 u 
(10)
Further, the tangential component vt of velocity (vt = v cos u) is
responsible for either enhancing or suppressing splash around the
rim of the elliptical stain thereby causing the observed asymmetry
in splashing [18]. An expression has been derived [17] that deﬁnes
the splashing thresholds in both the forward and backward
directions of a stain formed on impact. Since the ratio of the
tangential and normal velocity components is given by:
vt
vn
¼ cotan u
Fig. 3. Examples of stains following non-perpendicular impact from a 0.8 m drop
height: (a) u = 808; (b) u = 608; (c) u = 408; and (d) u = 208.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
79


--- PAGE 5 ---

this expression may be written as:
WenRe1=2
n
½1  kRe1=2
n
cotan u
2 > K 
(11)
The constant k is of order one while K depends on the surface
roughness. It is clear that Eq. (6) is a special case of this result for
perpendicular impact. When the negative sign is taken the
splashing threshold is reduced as the tangential velocity compo-
nent suppresses splash while for the positive sign enhancement
occurs and the threshold is raised. This result explains why splash
features are enhanced in the forward direction and increasingly
suppressed in the backward direction as the impact angle is
reduced from 908 (Fig. 3). Around the circumference of the stain the
component of vt acting in the direction of spine formation will
change thereby generating a gradual movement of the threshold
for the onset of splash from the back direction round the rim
towards the forward direction as the impact angle decreases (see
Fig. 3). In addition there will be fewer spines in total as the angle is
reduced since the normal component of impact velocity is
decreasing (Eq. (9)).
It is clear from geometrical considerations that the impact point
of the droplet on an inclined surface is not in the centre of the
consequent elliptical stain; rather it lies towards the back side of
the stain and increasingly so as the incident angle decreases [16].
Since this is source of the rapidly moving lamella which is
responsible for the characteristics if the stain, it implies that any
spines should be directed towards this point. The spread of the
lamella from the contact point is asymmetric as the difference in
the velocities of the front and back edges of the lamella increases as
the impact angle decreases. When the radial velocity of the back
edge tends to zero it has reached its maximum extent [16].
In the only related study in the context of blood [19], empirical
relationships were derived for the area of the elliptical stain and
the number of spines in terms of the impact angle. These were seen
as a general case of the equations used in Ref. [4] for the speciﬁc
instance of perpendicular impact on a surface. More recently [20]
experimental data from the angular impact of water droplets on a
PVC surface was used to validate the application of Eq. (3) (for
We < 1000) to relate the area of the elliptical stain to the incident
droplet diameter. The implication of the outcome of this work is
that the area of a stain depends only on the initial droplet diameter
and the impact velocity, not on the impact angle. Nevertheless it
was also indicated that, for low impact angles (u < 218), the
tangential velocity component tends to override any transverse
spreading of the droplet [20].
There is one splash feature which is only observed following
non-perpendicular impact. This is a single cast-off feature. Since
this always appears in the forward direction, it will be termed a
cast-forward feature for clarity (see Fig. 3(d)). This may vary in
appearance from a small relatively wide protuberance to a very
long slender strand which may display wave cast-off structure
[15]. It originates from a small amount of the liquid not being
retained within the stain but continuing to move forward across
the surface on impact. This appears to not have received any
theoretical attention in the literature but should not be regarded as
a spine but as a quite separate splash feature.
3. Experimental methods and materials
The basic experimental technique for producing bloodstains under speciﬁed
impact conditions is fairly straightforward though care needs to be taken at various
points to ensure the reproducibility of results. Human blood was obtained as a
single sachet from the UK National Blood Transfusion Service and either used when
fresh or after freezing and subsequent overnight defrosting in a refrigerator.
Appropriate safety precautions were taken throughout its use. All samples were
agitated and brought to room temperature before use. Each sample was used for
only a short period before a fresh amount of blood was taken from the refrigerator.
These procedures were found to produce consistent results. Paper was chosen as a
model substrate due to its uniform surface quality which has a low roughness and
absorption, yet is not non-porous. Surface dependant effects were thereby
minimised during the formation of stains and for this substrate it was considered
justiﬁable to take the ﬁnal stain diameter as the maximum spreading diameter D.
A glass separating funnel ﬁtted with a tap acted as a reservoir for the blood and
was secured to a Kaiser rePro photographic camera (copy) stand that allowed
smooth variation in drop height over a wide range. Plastic nozzles were ﬁtted to the
reservoir as required to provide appropriately sized droplets. Droplets could be
produced reliably by careful control of the tap. All stains were produced on standard
photocopy paper taped to rigid cutting-mats which could be easily moved across to
a separate camera stand for immediate imaging. The cutting-mats were either
placed on the base of the camera stand or on an adjustable inclined plane to
generate the required angular impact. Imaging was carried out using a Motic digital
camera and images were analysed with Motic Images Plus 2.0 imaging and analysis
software. Calibration was achieved by an x–y scale placed alongside the stains prior
to imaging. Circular stain diameters and the length and breadth of elliptical stains
were measured by manual ﬁtting of either a circular or elliptical outline to each
stain displayed on the computer screen. Splash features were examined manually in
a similar fashion. For perpendicular impact a second method was used for this latter
measurement based on measuring the angle subtended by a group of well-formed
and regularly spaced scallops or spines around the circumference of the stain and
scaling that number up to the full circumference. Due to axial symmetry these
features should be regularly spaced and only disrupted by minor perturbations
during impact. By ignoring those parts of the stain outline and using only a
sequence of unperturbed spines and scallops it was found that there was less scatter
in the ﬁnal data. Angles were measured using an appropriate tool in the Motic
software.
Droplet volumes were obtained gravimetrically as an average of ﬁfty droplets,
assuming a typical density for blood of 1060 kg m3 then converted to diameters by
assuming a spherical shape. Although oscillation of the droplet may take place
when it is released [21], these die away quite rapidly [7] though the decay rate is
slower for larger droplets. For blood droplets in the size range used in this work it
has been shown that oscillations are not detectable after a fall of 0.4 m [21]. Other
studies using high-speed photography has shown that, on impact, droplets have a
spherical shape to a good degree of approximation [22]. For the perpendicular
impact experiments, three droplet sizes were used and for each around 35 separate
measurements made across the range of drop heights from 0.01 to 1.90 m. Angular
impact experiments were made for one droplet size only (4.21 mm diameter) at 108
intervals from 908 down to 208 with around 12 separate drop heights at each angle
over the same height range. The heights were selected to ensure that the impact
velocity range was explored at uniform intervals. In all cases ﬁve repeat stains were
produced and an average for each measurement calculated. The approximate
equilibrium contact angle for a blood droplet on photocopier paper was measured
using the sessile drop method and yielded a value of 828  38.
It was essential to obtain accurate measurement of impact velocity so a separate
set of calibration experiments was carried out using a set of optical gates linked to a
Pasco measurement system. This enabled the impact velocity and the time to
impact to be obtained over an appropriate range of drop heights for all three droplet
sizes. To achieve the desired ﬂexibility when analysing the later data sets, these
results were used to ﬁt kinematic equations incorporating air resistance, which
were subsequently used to obtain the correct impact velocity for any speciﬁed drop
height. It was found that the effects of air resistance were best modelled by a term
quadratic in velocity typical of turbulent ﬂow. The velocity v and time t data were
used to determine the air resistance coefﬁcient, expressed as the equivalent
terminal velocity vT for a particular droplet size, using [23]:
vðtÞ ¼ vTtanh
gt
vT
 

(12)
To determine the impact velocity for any particular height, the time to impact
was calculated from the drop height using:
yðtÞ ¼ v2
T
g ln cosh gt
vT
 

 

(13)
The time was then used to calculate the impact velocity using Eq. (12). Fig. 4
shows the velocity versus drop height characteristics for each of the three blood
droplets sizes.
All measurements were stored within Excel spreadsheets where all the data
processing and analysis was carried out. Finally, values for the viscosity
(h = 0.0044 Pa s) [4] and surface tension (g = 0.062 N m1) [24,25] of human blood
were taken from the literature. Although the precise values adopted are not crucial
to the detailed interpretation of the results, it is pertinent to comment on the
viscosity in particular. As a non-Newtonian ﬂuid the viscosity of blood is shear-
dependent, reducing in magnitude as the shear is increased. The shearing forces
experienced during the spreading of the stain are unknown and so whatever value is
adopted will be an estimate with some associated uncertainty. The average
viscosity of 0.0044 Pa s quoted in Ref. [4] is identical to the mean value found in a
separate study [26] across a large sample of healthy adults measured under
conditions of moderate shear. The standard deviation across the sample given for
this study was 0.0006 Pa s which implies a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 14%.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
80


--- PAGE 6 ---

It is reasonable to suppose that, as the blood used in this present work came from
the UK Blood Transfusion Service, it originated from a healthy adult, providing
justiﬁcation for using this particular value here. Finally, as the stain diameter is a
function of the viscosity to the power of a quarter (Eq. (3)), a RSD of 14% would give a
consequent RSD in D, arising from this uncertainty in the viscosity, of around 3.5%.
4. Results
The stains were found mostly to be highly reproducible.
Standard errors expressed as a percentage of the measurement
were in a range up to 1% with an average of 0.6% for measurements
of stain diameters on perpendicular impact and nearer to an
average of 0.8% for widths and lengths on non-perpendicular
impact. In the latter case the uncertainty was at the higher end of
this range for the more oblique impact results. In counting scallops
and spines the absolute standard error was around 1 for
perpendicular impact. Uncertainty was higher for non-perpendicular
impact as the magnitude of the features could be very small and
harder to deﬁne.
4.1. Perpendicular impact
Initially, to assess the spreading behaviour of all three droplet
sizes, the circular stain diameter D has been plotted against v1/4,
and compared with the basic theoretical predictions from Eq. (3).
This is presented in Fig. 5.
In all cases the data appear to follow two separate linear trends
– one for lower velocities and the other for higher velocities. All
tend towards following the line indicated by the basic model
(Eq. (3)) only at the very highest velocities with the data for the
smallest droplet showing the best agreement over the largest
range while that of the largest droplet falls short of the model over
almost all the range of these measurements. Overall the basic
model falls far short in following the trends both in gradient and
intercept of all three sets of experimental data. For all three sets of
measurements there is a distinct bend in the graph at the point
where the two linear trends meet. In order to explore this in more
detail a second graph was produced. This time each stain was
allocated one of the three categories: no splash; scalloped; spines.
These designations were made subjectively. The criterion invoked
to distinguish between the last two was the nature of the curvature
at the features. For scallops there should be a clear convex outline
while for spines this should have developed into a discontinuity or
point from which liquid may splash outward. These data are given
in Fig. 6.
Inspection of Fig. 6 reveals that the bend in the data appears to
occur at the point where scallop features start to appear. This
means that for stains exhibiting either scallops or spines, Eq. (3)
appears to form the basis of an appropriate model whereas for
stains with no features around the circumference this model does
not provide a ﬁt to these data.
Bearing in mind that Eq. (6) is believed to deﬁne the splashing
threshold, the values of the two characteristic quantities WeRe1/2
and We have been determined from these data and are given in
Table 1. These appear to show that a value of K  26,500 is
appropriate for the formation of spines around bloodstains on
paper while the onset of scallops is governed rather by the We
number alone with a value of 240 being suggested here. It is worth
noting 
that 
the 
spine 
threshold 
could 
arguably 
be 
given
alternatively by We  560 on the basis of these data.
As is suggested by Eq. (7), the number of spines or scallops
around each stain plotted against We1/2 should result in a straight
line graph that is independent of droplet size. Examination of Fig. 7
shows that this appears to be true for We1/2 < 35 or so. However,
for larger values, the data veers away from this trend to follow a
path of lower gradient. For comparison the line satisfying N = We1/2
is included in this graph and appears to follow the trend of these
data extremely well suggesting that in this case the empirical
coefﬁcient in Eq. (7) should be around unity, as was found
previously for blood [4]. It was noted that the point at which the
data deviates from this trend does not correspond particularly to
the transition from scallops to spines so its origin seems
unconnected with these characteristics of the stain. The implica-
tion is that as the impact velocity (and hence We) increases further
the number of spines appears to saturate. This hypothesis has been
previously suggested though not experimentally veriﬁed [10] and
appears to be supported by Fig. 8 which shows the length occupied
by a spine around the circumference of the stain as a function of
We1/2. For lower impact speeds (and We1/2) this quantity increases
quite rapidly and corresponds to the linear section of Fig. 7.
However for larger values of We1/2 where Fig. 7 deviates from the
We1/2 law, the length per spine tends to a constant value in the
range 1.3–1.6 mm with some small differences in that limit
dependant on the droplet size.
It was also observed from these data that the number of spines
occurring at the splash threshold is independent of droplet size and
equal to 20–22 across all three cases. This is in fair agreement with
the prediction of Eq. (5):
Nmin ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
26; 500
48
r
 23:5
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6
D mm
v1/4 (m s-1 )1/4
d =  3.28 m m
d =  4.21 m m
d =  5.15 m m
equaon 
 
3 (3.28 mm)
equaon 
 
3 (4.21 mm)
equaon 
 
3 (5.15 mm)
Fig. 5. Experimental stain diameters as a function of v1/4 for all three droplet sizes.
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
impact velocity m s-1
height m
5.15 mm diameter
 
droplet
4.21 mm diameter
 
droplet
3.28 mm diameter
 
droplet
free -fa ll (n o air re sistance)
Fig. 4. Velocity versus drop height for the three blood droplet sizes.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
81


--- PAGE 7 ---

In contrast, the minimum number of scallops appeared to
increase slightly with increasing droplet size, from a value of 12 to
around 15 for the largest droplet. In summary, while the form of
Eq. (7) is appropriate to predict both the number of scallop and
spine features, the threshold criterion (Eq. (6)) appears valid for
spine formation speciﬁcally.
4.2. Non-perpendicular impact
Firstly, the hypothesis that the transverse spreading of the stain
is determined by the perpendicular component of the impact
velocity (Eq. (10)) was examined by plotting the stain width W
against v1=4
n
for each impact angle to produce graphs analogous to
Fig. 5. These are shown together in Fig. 9. The prediction of Eq. (10)
is provided for comparison.
It is clear that for impact angles from 908 down to 408 the
dependency is identical and follows the trend set by perpendicular
impact. This is an important result in determining the principal
factor responsible for the width of an elliptical stain. However for
the lowest impact angles of 308 and 208 there is only agreement for
the very lowest velocities with the stain widths increasing at a
slightly lower rate than predicted over most of the range examined
here. This suggests that when the tangential velocity component vt
is high it may override the effect of vn to some extent as was
previously suggested [20].
Next the validity of Eq. (8) for the calculation of impact angle
from the stain dimensions was investigated, particularly as a
function of impact speed. These results are given in Fig. 10. The
horizontal dotted lines deﬁne the impact angles set in each
experiment. These graphs show some quite subtle variations
across both the speed and the impact angle ranges examined here.
In general the accepted formula (Eq. (8)) will underestimate and
rarely overestimate the impact angle. It appears to be most reliable
at impact speeds above 3 ms1 – equivalent to drop heights
above 0.5 m – and for angles below 608–708. For angles around
808 and for low impact speeds the formula appears to underesti-
mate the angle by up to 78 or so. This result is important as it
suggests there are systematic as well as random uncertainties in
the use of Eq. (8) in the interpretation of blood spatter patterns.
Initial interpretation of the features around elliptical stains may
be made qualitatively by assessing the type of feature at the front
and back edges of the stain as a function of the perpendicular and
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6
D mm
v1/4 (m s-1)1/4
no splas
 
h featur
 es
scallops
spines
Fig. 6. Experimental stain diameters as a function of v1/4 categorised according to the presence of splash features.
Table 1
Experimental threshold values for scallops and spines.
Droplet d (mm) 
We 
WeRe1/2
Scallops 
Spines 
Scallops 
Spines
3.38 
224 
593 
7860 
26,499
4.21 
213 
536 
7780 
24,656
5.15 
272 
568 
11,109 
27,909
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
10
 
.0
20
 
.0
30
 
.0
40
 
.0
50
 
.0
60
 
.0
Spine number N
We1/2
small
mediu 
m
large
modiﬁed equaon
 
7
Fig. 7. Spine/scallop number against We1/2 for all droplet sizes.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
82


--- PAGE 8 ---

tangential velocity components to produce a ‘‘map’’ of scallops,
spines and cast-forward (Fig. 11). Features at the forward edge of
the stain are on the right while those at the back are on the left of
this ﬁgure. A radial line outward from the origin corresponds to a
constant impact angle. A key outcome of this is that the cast-
forward feature occurs only when the impact angle is below 458
(implying that vt > vn) and at lower impact velocities.
Next the total number of scallops and spines around the
elliptical stains may be interpreted by comparing the total number
of such features with the basic theoretical prediction of Eq. (9).
These data are displayed in Fig. 12 where the solid line represents
Eq. (9) evaluated for perpendicular impact with the constant factor
amended to unity following the interpretation in Fig. 7.
This shows that as expected the data for 908 impact agrees with
that displayed in Fig. 7 while there is a systematic decrease in the
total number of spines as the impact angle decreases down to 408
below which no spines are formed for this range of impact speeds.
For each angle however the variation with We1/2 remains
approximately linear. This behaviour is, of course, expected as
the splashing threshold will decrease as u decreases at a rate given
by the angular factor contained in WenRe1=2
n
. The rate at which
spines are suppressed from the stain will show a similar angular
dependence though the detail of this depends on the effect of the
tangential component of velocity as it acts around the stain
circumference as indicated speciﬁcally for the forward and
backward extremes in Eq. (11). Nevertheless the general direction
of the trend will be given by the factor in front of the bracket in
Eq. (11) and hence the change in the proportion of spines seen will
be given approximately by:
WenRe1=2
n
WeRe1=2 ¼ sin5=2 u
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60
πD/N (mm)
We1/2
small - scallops
 
small - spines
large  - scallops
 
large  - spines
mediu 
m - scallop 
s 
mediu 
m - spines
Fig. 8. Length per spine around the circumference of stains as a function of We1/2.
0
5
10
15
20
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6
W mm
vn
1/4 (m s-1)1/4
90 deg
80 deg
70 deg
60 deg
50 deg
40 deg
30 deg
20 deg
equ aon 10
Fig. 9. The transverse width of stains W as a function of v1=4
n
.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Angle from stain axial rao θ (degrees)
Impact speed
 
v ms-1
80 deg
70 deg
60 deg
50 deg
40 deg
30 deg
20 deg
Fig. 10. Comparison of the impact angle calculated from the stain axial ratio with
those set in each experiment, as a function of impact speed.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-6 
-4 
-2 
0 
2 
4 
6
Normal component of impact velocity vn m s-1
Tangenal compon
 
ent of impact ve
 
locity vt m s-1 (+ implies
 
same di recon as spre ad)
scallop
 
s
spin
 
es
no spl ash featu res
cast-forward
Fig. 11. Velocity map of splash features around elliptical stains.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
83


--- PAGE 9 ---

This implies that a correction may be applied to the form of
Eq. (9) to give:
N  We1=2
n
sin5=2 u ¼ We1=2 sin7=2 u 
(14)
This expression is represented for each of the impact angles in
the form of dashed lines in Fig. 12. While these do not provide a full
explanation of the experimental measurements it is clear that they
do explain the general variation with angle particularly for higher
numbers of spines. These predictions should deﬁne to some extent
the maximum number of spines and this is borne out by Fig. 12. It is
worth noting that the form of Eq. (14) is close to the empirical
dependency on sin3 u for angular impact data found previously
[19]. Indeed the multiplicative correction factor needed to bring
Eq. (14) into best-ﬁt agreement with these data is found to be 0.88
which is similar to the factor of 0.76 found by these authors for
their system.
The effect of the tangential velocity component on splash
threshold deﬁned by Eq. (11) may be evaluated against the
experimental 
measurements 
by 
plotting 
WeRe1/2/K 
against
cotan u/Re1/2. This relationship is shown in Fig. 13 where each
point represents the presence or absence of splash features on a
stain. The threshold itself is deﬁned by a solid line where the
arbitrary constant k has been adjusted to best ﬁt the data (k = 6.5).
It is apparent that in the forward direction – representing the front
of the elliptical stain – this model predicts the threshold from non-
splash to splash features quite well. However, in the backward
direction it is far less successful, particularly as the magnitude of
the tangential component increases. In this region the suppression
of splash around the back of the stain appears to occur more readily
than is suggested by Eq. (11). However it can be difﬁcult to assess
the presence of closely-spaced yet very small spines around the
back edge of some of these stains and this may have led in a few
cases to the conclusion of suppression when it may have not in fact
have occurred.
In summary, these investigations have shown that the width of
the elliptical stain depends on impact conditions in the same way
(Eq. (10)) as does the diameter of a circular stain, except for low
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Total spine number: expt N; theory Wen
1/2sin5/2θ
Wen
1/2
90 deg 
90 deg th
80 deg 
80 deg th
70 deg 
70 deg th
60 deg 
60 deg th
50 deg 
50 deg th
40 deg 
40 deg th
Fig. 12. Variation of total spine number versus theoretical predictions for elliptical stains.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-0.16 
-0.12 
-0.08 
-0.04 
0.00 
0.04 
0.08 
0.12 
0.16
WeRe1/2/K
cot
 an θ/Re1/2
scallo
 ps
spines
no splash featu
 res
cast-forward
thresh
 old k = 6.
 5
Fig. 13. The interpretation of the splashing threshold for angular impact stains.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
84


--- PAGE 10 ---

impact angles of 308 or less when it overestimates the magnitude.
The conventional formula for calculating impact angle from the
aspect ratio of a stain (Eq. (8)) will generally underestimate and
rarely over-estimate that angle. It works best for higher impact
speeds and for impact angles below 708. The formation of spines
around an elliptical stain is principally determined by the impact
point and the perpendicular component of velocity. However since
the effect of the splash threshold changes with impact angle and
the tangential component of the velocity may act to suppress spine
formation, fewer spines are observed than predicted by Eq. (9). It
has been shown that the consequent inclusion of a trigonometric
factor in this expression, based on the splashing threshold,
provides 
a 
theoretical 
basis 
to 
support 
previous 
empirical
justiﬁcation [19] relating spine number to impact conditions for
such bloodstains.
5. Discussion
5.1. Spreading behaviour for perpendicular impact
The results for perpendicular impact have revealed the
following points as far as bloodstain formation on paper is
concerned. The model for stain diameter expressed as Eq. (3) most
accurately describes stains formed from smaller droplets travelling
at higher speeds. For larger droplets and lower impact velocities
this expression overestimates diameters. This is not out of line
with previous work as most studies have been on droplets at the
lower end or below the size range investigated here (Table 2).
However the fact that all experimental stain diameters are
lower than the size predicted by an energy balance model suggests
that some energy is being dissipated in a manner not already
accounted for. Such differences cannot be explained simply by
incorporating some constant multiplicative correction factor to
Eq. (3), for example to compensate for any uncertainty in the
viscosity. As discussed earlier this model does not account for
surface characteristics such as roughness, elasticity, wettability
and porosity all of which could account for energy loss to some
extent. To investigate the effect of this factor in general on the stain
size, an additional term may be incorporated into the derivation of
Eq. (4). The reasonable assumption that the energy loss will depend
on stain area leads to the simplest form of expression since it
means that an empirical term such as BD2 needs to be included
where B is an arbitrary constant. Consequently Eq. (1) becomes:
1
2
prd3
6
  
!
v2 þ pgd2 ¼ BD2 þ pgD2
4
ð1  cos uaÞ þ
p
3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Re
p
rv2dD2
Since this already contains the term dependant on D2 describing
the surface energy associated with advancing contact angle, the
ﬁrst two terms on the RHS may be combined into a single term
represented by the constant term A in the consequent revised
version of Eq. (4) as:
ðWe þ 12Þb ¼ 8 þ b3
A þ
4ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Re
p
We
 

(15)
Here A will have a minimum value of 2.6 (assuming ue = 828)
corresponding to B = 0 which may then increase as additional
energy is lost due to surface-speciﬁc properties. This equation may
be readily evaluated to yield b using the iterative form:
b ¼ D
d ¼
We þ 12  ð8=bÞ
A þ 4ðWe=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Re
p
Þ
  
!1=2
(16)
By taking the experimental value of D as an initial estimate, this
converged quickly to a constant, predicted value of b in two
iterations. The magnitude of A was varied until best agreement was
obtained with the experimental data according to the minimisa-
tion of the sum of the squares of the residual differences criterion.
The results of this calculation are given in Fig. 14.
The overall agreement of this model with the experimental
measurement of stain diameter is very good over the very wide
impact velocity range shown here and appears best for the data
from the medium-sized droplet. The suspected discontinuity
mentioned earlier that coincides with the onset of scallops around
the stain is not, of course, built into this simple model and so is not
reproduced though it is likely to involve a small step change in the
energy dissipation. The best-ﬁt values for A were found to be 7.6,
9.0 and 12.6 for the small, medium and large droplets respectively
which reﬂects some dependency on droplet size. Further reﬁne-
ment of this model is possible but would need to be validated
across measurements from a wide range of types of surface in order
to properly account for the surface properties discussed previously.
5.2. Splashing behaviour on perpendicular impact
These results show that the accepted expression for splashing
threshold (Eq. (6)) appears to correlate well with the formation of
spines for bloodstains on paper and may be used to estimate a
lower or upper limit on impact conditions for an individual stain.
Although there appear to be different thresholds governing the
formation of scallops and of spines and we would argue that these
are distinct though related features, this differentiation does not
appear to have been discussed in the literature. Indeed confusion
over which feature was being referred to may have led to apparent
discrepancies in splashing thresholds between some authors.
Further to this, Eq. (7), with a small adjustment to the scaling
factor, appears to provide a good explanation for the number of
spines/scallops observed around a stain as long as the impact
Weber number is below 1000, corresponding to an impact
velocity of 4 m s1 or a drop height of 0.8 m for a droplet of
Table 2
Examples of liquid droplet diameters used by other workers.
Reference 
Droplet diameters (mm) 
Liquid
[2] 
1.5 
n-Heptane
[3] 
2.05 
Water; water + surfactant
[11] 
0.55, 1.30 
Water
[4] 
3.0, 3.7, 4.3 
Blood
[5] 
2.5, 2.7, 3.6 
Water; formamide
This work 
3.28, 4.21, 5.15 
Blood
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
Stain diameter D (mm)
Re1/4
d = 3.28 mm
d = 4.21 mm
d = 5.15 mm
equaon 16
 
: d = 3.28 mm
equaon 16
 
: d = 4.21 mm
equaon 16
 
: d = 5.15 mm
Fig. 14. Comparison of experimental data with the revised model for stain diameter.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
85


--- PAGE 11 ---

diameter 4.21 mm. Above this value this formula gives an
overestimate as the length per spine around the circumference
seems to approach a limiting value. This may be due to closely
spaced spines being energetically unfavourable on account of the
consequent high curvature of the liquid edge between them. This
work shows that this limit depends to some extent on droplet size,
with smaller droplets having a lower limit, though it is likely that it
will be affected also by surface characteristics.
These observations on both the spreading and spine formation
in circular stains imply that there are quite signiﬁcant lower and
upper limits on the validity of the method of determining both
droplet volume and impact velocity through the simultaneous
solution of Eqs. (3) and (7) [11].
5.3. Spreading behaviour for non-perpendicular impact
The stain areas have been calculated using the experimental
data to enable comparison between those for angular impact and
those for perpendicular impact with the same impact speed. It has
been suggested [20] that the area remains unchanged as the angle
decreases from 908 and the speed remains constant. However it is
not clear whether these authors have provided a proper theoretical
basis for this and taken account of the effect of the curvature of the
elliptical stain in calculating the viscous dissipation energy term in
Eq. (1) prior to using it to evaluate area. The stain area has also been
used previously in the empirical investigation of angular impact
data [19].
The areas measured in this current work are presented for
comparison in Fig. 15. The perpendicular and non-perpendicular
areas are certainly in excellent agreement for stains up to around
135 mm2 but thereafter there is some additional spreading of up to
10% in those due to non-perpendicular impact. These larger stains
correspond to drop heights above 0.3 m (impact velocities above
2.4 m s1). What is most unexpected is that there appears to be no
obvious angular dependence to the comparison of these stain areas
since the scatter of points for those at the lowest impact angles
intermix with those from much higher angles. It was noted earlier
from Fig. 9 that stain widths for those lowest angles are less than
predicted theoretically so for the areas to increase in these cases, the
stain lengths must show some increase over what is expected.
Further, all stains at 208 impact and many at 308 and 408 have a cast-
forward feature, yet the consequent loss of blood does not seem to
affect the elliptical area of the stain itself to any signiﬁcant extent.
The derivation of Eq. (8) is based on simple geometrical
principles which assume the spreading is proportional to the
geometric proﬁle of the droplet on impact at a particular angle. For
angles of 408 and above we have shown that the transverse
spreading 
is 
explained 
only 
by 
the 
perpendicular 
velocity
component. This however is the only deﬁnitive outcome as both
the results for the stain aspect ratio (Fig. 10) and stain area (Fig. 15)
reveal small but systematic discrepancies from the basic relation-
ships. These suggest that there is a need for the development of a
model for the spreading of elliptical stains analogous to that for
circular stains (Eq. (2)).
5.4. Splashing behaviour for non-perpendicular impact
Although this is the more complex aspect to understand, it is
potentially the most useful for interpretation. Figs. 11 and 13
provide a semi-quantitative picture of the factors affecting the
formation of the splash and other features observed around these
stains while Fig. 12 shows that there is some theoretical basis to
the angular dependence of spine formations despite the difﬁculty
in some instances in the practical counting of these features.
Indeed this is likely to be a key limiting factor in using the pattern
of spines around the perimeter to interpret elliptical stains.
Nevertheless, theoretical work to develop a model for the angular
distribution of spines around a stain as a function of impact
velocity and droplet size, as an extension to the derivation [17] of
Eq. (11), remains to be done. This should include study of the
transition from classic spine/scallop formation to the generation of
the cast-forward feature at low velocity and low impact angles
which is likely to prove most useful to case-work interpretation.
5.5. A strategy for the interpretation of single bloodstains
Finally, it is useful to consider the implications of this work for
the interpretation of a single bloodstain, in particular whether the
droplet volume and impact velocity may be deduced, and also
what limitations and issues remain to be investigated. Despite the
fact that these models for spreading and splashing have been
investigated, developed and validated for stain formation on a
paper substrate, they do provide some generic implications for the
application and range of validity of such approaches to the
interpretation of stains in general.
Initial inspection should look for suppression of spines along
part of the circumference which would indicate the impact angle
was not perpendicular and facilitate measurement of the length
and breadth of the stain. For perpendicular impact, determination
of pD/N coupled with Fig. 8 will show whether the measurements
lie in the region of validity of Eq. (7) or not. If pD/N lies in the
constant region then this strong correlation between spreading
and the number of spines appears to preclude calculation of d and v
from the data. However, Fig. 8 indicates some dependence on
droplet size which may enable estimation of d directly. For pD/N
below this range, Eq. (7) is valid (with an appropriate constant
multiplicative factor). Where spines or scallops are visible then the
stain diameter is given approximately by Eq. (3) or more accurately
by Eq. (16), particularly if the droplet size is large, and hence by
combining these measurements d and v may be calculated.
If no scallops or spines are observed on the stain then Eq. (6) will
set an upper limit on WeRe1/2 and it is essential that Eq. (16) is used
to interpret the diameter. These measurements could allow for the
calculation of limiting estimates only, for d and v.
For non-perpendicular impact determination of the impact
angle 
from 
stain 
dimensions 
may 
be 
followed 
using 
the
conventional formula (Eq. (8)). Bearing in mind the difﬁculty in
reliably counting spines from such stains, combining such
information with Eq. (14) and the interpretation of the stain
width using Eq. (10) would enable the calculation of d and v. It is
suggested that this approach is more reliable than using stain area
as previously suggested [19] though the accuracy may be limited
0
50
100
150
200
250
250
200
150
100
50
0
experimental area of ellipcal stain mm2
area of equivalent
 
perpendicular impact stain mm2
80 deg
70 deg
60 deg
50 deg
40 deg
30 deg
20 deg
exact equivalence
Fig. 15. Comparison of experimental stain areas for non-perpendicular and
perpendicular impact at the same speed.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87
86


--- PAGE 12 ---

for low impact angles. For elliptical stains where no spines are
present, comparison with a ‘‘splash map’’ such as Fig. 11 may
indicate the range of the impact velocity though further work is
needed to validate whether this approach is independent of
droplet size i.e. can such a diagram be produced in terms of
components of WeRe1/2 say, rather than the velocity only?
Combining this information with stain breadth interpreted using
Eq. (10) may enable estimates of d and v to be obtained.
These comments are predicated on a proper understanding on
how the fundamental equations need to be modiﬁed to account for
the surface properties of a wider range of substrates such as those
that might be found routinely in casework. Such surfaces may
exhibit different characteristics of roughness, elasticity, wettability
and porosity, and systematic studies of the effect of such properties
on the spreading and splashing of blood remain to be done.
6. Conclusions
From a review of the literature and the analysis of the
experimental work described in this article on the spreading
and splashing of blood droplets on paper surfaces, it has been
concluded that there are fundamental mathematical expressions
that may form the basis of more detailed modelling of such stains.
These enable us to understand the characteristics of bloodstains
according to the principles of physics and mathematics thereby
putting the interpretation of bloodstain patterns on a sound
theoretical basis. For perpendicular impact it has been shown that
the interpretation of a single stain may yield useful information on
its impact conditions, though only within a very limited range of
velocities would calculation of the droplet size and impact speed
be achievable to a good degree of accuracy. For non-perpendicular
impact, current models are more approximate and a rigorous
theoretical examination of such systems remains to be done.
Nevertheless, for elliptical stains similar outcomes may be
obtained by using the stain width and an estimate of the number
of spines but again this would be over a limited range of speeds and
angles. Further, theoretical work to explain the mechanism for the
formation of the cast-forward feature on low angle, low velocity
impact stains would be of signiﬁcant beneﬁt to interpretation.
Finally, systematic, quantitative studies of the relationships
between surface properties and bloodstain characteristics are an
essential prerequisite to completing our fundamental understand-
ing of this important area of forensic science.
References
[1] M. Rein, Phenomena of liquid drop impact on solid and liquid surfaces, Fluid Dyn.
Res. 12 (1993) 61–93.
[2] S. Chandra, C.T. Avedisian, On the collision of a droplet with a solid surface, Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. A 432 (1991) 13–41.
[3] M. Pasandideh-Fard, Y.M. Qiao, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Capillary effects during
impact on a solid surface, Phys. Fluids 8 (3) (1996) 650–659.
[4] L. Hulse-Smith, N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, Deducing drop size and impact
velocity from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci. 50 (1) (2005) 1–10.
[5] C. Ukiwe, D.Y. Kwok, On the maximum spreading diameter of impacting droplets
on well-prepared solid surfaces, Langmuir 21 (2005) 666–673.
[6] D.C. Vadillo, A. Soucemarianadin, C. Delattre, D.C. Roux, Dynamic contact angle
effects onto the maximum drop impact spreading on solid surfaces, Phys. Fluids
21 (2009) 12202.
[7] C.D. Stow, M.G. Hadﬁeld, An experimental investigation of ﬂuid ﬂow resulting
from the impact of a water drop with an unyielding dry surface, Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
A 373 (1981) 419–441.
[8] R.F. Allen, The role of surface tension in splashing, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 51 (2)
(1975) 350–351.
[9] R. Bhola, S. Chandra, Parameters controlling solidiﬁcation of molten wax droplets
falling on a solid surface, J. Mater. Sci. 34 (1999) 4883–4894.
[10] N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Formation of ﬁngers around the
edges of a drop hitting a metal plate with high velocity, J. Fluid Mech. 510 (2004)
353–373.
[11] L. Hulse-Smith, M. Illes, A blind trial evaluation of a crime scene methodology for
deducing impact velocity and droplet size from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic
Sci. 52 (1) (2007) 65–69.
[12] L. Xu, Liquid drop splashing on smooth, rough and textured surfaces, Phys. Rev. E
75 (2007) 056316.
[13] R.E. Pepper, L. Courbin, H.A. Stone, Splashing on elastic membranes: the impor-
tance of early time dynamics, Phys. Fluids 20 (2008) 082103.
[14] H.L. MacDonell, Credit where it’s due, J. For. Ident. 61 (3) (2011) 210–221.
[15] P.A. Pizzola, S. Roth, P.R. De Forest, Blood droplet dynamics – II, J. Forensic Sci. 31
(1) (1986) 50–64.
[16] S. Sikalo, E.N. Ganic, Phenomena of droplet surface interactions, Exp. Therm. Fluid
Sci. 31 (2006) 97–110.
[17] J.C. Bird, S.S.H. Tsai, H.A. Stone, Inclined to splash: triggering and inhibiting a
splash with tangential velocity, New J. Phys. 11 (2009) 063017.
[18] L. Courbin, J.C. Bird, H.A. Stone, Splash and anti-splash: observation and design,
Chaos 16 (2006) 041102.
[19] C. Knock, M. Davison, Predicting the position of the source of blood stains for
angled impacts, J. Forensic Sci. 52 (5) (2007) 1044–1049.
[20] J. Cui, X. Chen, F. Wang, X. Gong, Z. Yu, Study of liquid droplets impact on dry
inclined surface, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng. 4 (2009) 643–648.
[21] M.A. Raymond, E.R. Smith, J. Liesegang, Oscillating blood droplets – implications
for crime scene reconstruction, Sci. Justice 36 (3) (1996) 161–171.
[22] D.C.D. Roux, J.J. Cooper-White, Dynamics of water spreading on a glass surface, J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 277 (2004) 424–436.
[23] G. Sposito, An Introduction to Classical Dynamics, Wiley, New York, 1976.
[24] J. Rosina, E. Kvasnak, D. Suta, H. Kolarova, J. Malek, L. Krajci, Temperature
dependence of blood surface tension, Physiol. Res. 56 (Suppl. 1) (2007) S93–S98.
[25] M.A. Raymond, E.R. Smith, J. Liesegang, The physical properties of blood – forensic
considerations, Sci. Justice 36 (3) (1996) 153–160.
[26] R.S. Rosenson, A. McCormick, E.F. Uretz, Distribution of blood viscosity values and
biochemical correlates in healthy adults, Clin. Chem. 42 (8) (1996) 1189–1195.
C.D. Adam / Forensic Science International 219 (2012) 76–87 
87
