

--- PAGE 1 ---

Heat exchange between a bouncing drop and a
superhydrophobic substrate
Samira Shiria and James C. Birda,1
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
Edited by William R. Schowalter, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved May 18, 2017 (received for review January 4, 2017)
The ability to enhance or limit heat transfer between a surface and
impacting drops is important in applications ranging from indus-
trial spray cooling to the thermal regulation of animals in cold rain.
When these surfaces are micro/nanotextured and hydrophobic, or
superhydrophobic, an impacting drop can spread and recoil over
trapped air pockets so quickly that it can completely bounce off
the surface. It is expected that this short contact time limits heat
transfer; however, the amount of heat exchanged and precise role
of various parameters, such as the drop size, are unknown. Here,
we demonstrate that the amount of heat exchanged between a
millimeter-sized water drop and a superhydrophobic surface will
be orders of magnitude less when the drop bounces than when
it sticks. Through a combination of experiments and theory, we
show that the heat transfer process on superhydrophobic surfaces
is independent of the trapped gas. Instead, we ﬁnd that, for a
given spreading factor, the small fraction of heat transferred is
controlled by two dimensionless groupings of physical parame-
ters: one that relates the thermal properties of the drop and bulk
substrate and the other that characterizes the relative thermal,
inertial, and capillary dynamics of the drop.
droplets | wetting | heat transfer | microtexture | feathers
A
n effective method to rapidly cool a surface is to intro-
duce a stream of cold liquid drops, a process referred to
as spray cooling (1, 2). Spray cooling is advantageous in appli-
cations ranging from electronics (3) to cryogenic dermatology
procedures (4). However, there are also situations in which this
rapid exchange of thermal energy with droplets is undesirable,
such as in ice formation on the wings of an airplane (5), exposure
to scalding liquids (6), or heat lost by animals with wet fur and
feathers (7, 8). Here, there is an effort to minimize heat exchange
by designing superhydrophobic surfaces that can rapidly shed
drops from the surface (9–11). Indeed, a drop impacting a super-
hydrophobic surface can completely bounce, leaving the surface
before all possible heat is transferred. However, there is likely
some heat exchanged during the short residence time of the drop,
and even a small amount of exchanged heat could become signif-
icant following aggregate exposure to multiple bouncing drops.
A similar bouncing phenomenon occurs when a drop impacts
a surface that is sufﬁciently hotter than the drop saturation tem-
perature. Under this Leidenfrost or superheated condition, the
drop bounces on a cushion of its own vapor (12, 13), prevent-
ing direct contact between the solid and liquid and severely
limiting the efﬁcacy of spray cooling (14, 15). Models have
been developed to predict the partial heat transfer that occurs
when drops impact superheated surfaces (16–18); however, it
is unclear which aspects of these models, if any, might extend
to drops impacting on a superhydrophobic surface when phase
change does not occur. In particular, these models typically con-
clude that the thermal properties of the vapor cushion determine
the amount of heat transferred.
Our study addresses how much heat is transferred during
the bounce of either a warm or cold water drop on a superhy-
drophobic substrate in the absence of phase change. Record-
ing the bounce with thermal and high-speed cameras simulta-
neously enables us to experimentally measure the transferred
heat by a single drop over a short residence time. We use can-
dle soot to create a superhydrophobic coating on the substrate,
both because it is a simple and effective technique (19, 20) and
because the surface properties of soot are highly compatible
with thermal imaging. Soot, like other superhydrophobic sur-
faces, combines chemical hydrophobicity with micro/nanoscale
texture, a combination that can support signiﬁcant air under a
water drop (21, 22). The supported air leads to a large effec-
tive contact angle and low contact friction, which together cause
an impacting drop to rapidly recoil and completely bounce off
the surface (23). Indeed, if air escaped from the microstructure,
the drop would transition from a Cassie to a Wenzel state, and
bouncing would not occur (24). Replacing the vapor layer in pre-
vious superheated models (16, 17) with this constant-thickness,
air-ﬁlled layer predicts the transferred heat Q should scale with
initial drop radius R as Q ∼R3.5. This scaling is different from
the relation that we ﬁnd for the superhydrophobic surfaces in our
experiments, Q ∼R2.75.
We propose two different mechanisms that could result in this
scaling: one in which the heat transfer is dictated by a cush-
ion of air separating the drop from the superhydrophobic sur-
face and the other in which the heat transfer is based on direct
thermal exchange between the drop and the substrate. To dis-
cern these mechanisms, we modify the substrate material in our
experiments and the subsequent results support the predictions
of the direct contact model. We also demonstrate—on a bird
feather—an additional model prediction that, for a given ﬂow
rate, a superhydrophobic surface can be cooled faster by small
drops than by large ones.
Results and Discussion
The heat exchange between a drop and a substrate during a
bounce is demonstrated experimentally in Fig. 1. A glass slide
is coated with a layer of soot with average thickness δ ≈30 µm
(Fig. S1). A hot water drop with radius R = 1.2 mm and initial
Signiﬁcance
A superhydrophobic surface can be so water repellent that
a drop can bounce off the surface in milliseconds. By mea-
suring the thermal interaction between a superhydrophobic
substrate and a heated or cooled drop, we demonstrate that
the contact time is short enough that only a small fraction of
potential heat is transferred, and, counterintuitively, smaller
drops transfer a larger fraction of their potential heat than
larger drops despite contacting the surface for less time. Our
results indicate that birds with superhydrophobic feathers will
be warmer in cold rain than those with feathers on which
drops stick, and we envision that a better understanding of
these mechanisms can inspire the design of superhydrophobic
materials to control heat exchange.
Author contributions: J.C.B. designed research; S.S. performed research; S.S. and J.C.B.
analyzed data; and S.S. and J.C.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: jbird@bu.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1700197114/-/DCSupplemental.
6930–6935
|
PNAS
|
July 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 27
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700197114
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.


--- PAGE 2 ---

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
Fig. 1.
The ﬁnite-time heat exchange between a drop and a superhy-
drophobic substrate. (A) A water drop impacts a glass substrate coated with
a thin layer δ ≈30 µm of soot. (B) A scanning electron microscope image
of the soot layer reveals the submicrometer roughness responsible for the
substrate superhydrophobicity. (C) High-speed images show that the water
drop bounces, residing on the surface for a ﬁnite time tr = 11.8 ms. Here
the drop radius is R = 1.2 mm and the impact velocity is U = 0.74 ms−1.
(D) Simultaneous thermographic images, from an orthogonal perspective,
show a temperature map of the drop surface and substrate during impact.
(E) The drop leaves a thermal footprint on the substrate that decays over
time. Note that the spatial information from the thermal camera suffers
from motion blur due to the 8-ms time response in the uncooled sensor. This
exposure time is too long to accurately resolve details during the impact, but
is short enough to characterize the thermal footprint left from the drop.
temperature Tℓ= 52.7 ◦C is released from a suspended needle
and impacts, at velocity U = 0.74 ms−1, a soot-coated glass sub-
strate that is initially at ambient temperature Ts = 23.4 ◦C. Note
that the substrate temperature Ts is signiﬁcantly lower than the
saturation temperature for water. Even still, it is possible that the
drop might dimple as it nears impact, as has been documented
for drops as they approach smooth surfaces (25–27), trapping a
cushion of air between the drop and the superhydrophobic sur-
face (Fig. 1A).
When the drop contacts the substrate, the chemistry and sub-
micrometer structure of the soot coating (Fig. 1B) repel the
water so that the water drop bounces off the surface. The time
that the drop resides on the substrate, deﬁned as the residence
time tr, is less than 15 ms (Fig. 1C). Simultaneous thermal images
show that the drop leaves the surface before reaching thermal
equilibrium (Fig. 1D). The drop leaves a thermal footprint on the
substrate that decays over time (Fig. 1E). Due to the 8-ms time
response in the uncooled sensor, there is motion blur during drop
impact and recoil that is responsible for the apparent smearing of
the drop. However, these motion blur effects are negligible over
the longer timescales of the substrate footprint decay used in our
analysis.
Further details on the impact dynamics are revealed by plot-
ting the contact radius r(t) as the drop spreads and recoils on the
superhydrophobic surface (Fig. 2A). From high-speed images,
the contact radius and residence time are extracted for the drop
illustrated in Fig. 1. The drop spreads out to a maximum con-
tact radius rm that is larger than the initial radius of the drop
by a spreading factor of rm/R = 1.24. The drop then recoils
until it loses contact with the surface at tr = 11.8 ms. The maxi-
mum contact radius rm is known to depend on the Weber num-
ber We ≡ρℓU 2R/γ, a balance of inertial and capillary effects
where ρℓis the liquid density, γ is the surface tension, and U
is the impact velocity (28, 29). In this paper, we control the
Weber number so that the spreading factor rm/R is limited to
a range between 1.2 and 1.7. In contrast, the residence time
is largely independent of the Weber number (23) and instead
scales with the inertial-capillary timescale
p
ρℓR3/γ. Indeed, the
residence time is near the axisymmetric hydrodynamic limit of
Fig. 2.
Extraction of the maximum contact radius rm and transferred heat Q
for the drop illustrated in Fig. 1. (A) Plot of the contact radius r(t) normalized
by drop radius R. (B) Average temperature of the drop footprint T on the
substrate surface (z = 0) over time t. The transferred heat Q is calculated by
ﬁtting a one-dimensional, semiinﬁnite heat exchange model (dotted line)
as the surface returns to its ambient temperature Ts. Here ks and αs are the
substrate thermal conductivity and diffusivity, respectively.
Shiri and Bird
PNAS
|
July 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 27
|
6931
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.


--- PAGE 3 ---

tr = 2.3
p
ρℓR3/γ, suggesting that the soot microstructure does
not pin the drop as it recedes (30, 31) and is therefore macro-
scopically equivalent to a drop bouncing on a vapor layer.
As the drop departs the surface, it leaves behind a thermal
footprint on the substrate (Fig. 1D), which we use to calculate
the transferred heat Q. Immediately after an impact, this heat is
concentrated near the substrate surface. We measure the aver-
age temperature T across the drop contact area for each ther-
mal time-series image, as noted in Mean Temperature Calcula-
tion (Fig. S2). Plotting this footprint temperature T over time t
illustrates that the temperature rises rapidly during impact and
then returns asymptotically to Ts with a decay rate of ∼50 ms
(Fig. 2B). For the conditions in this experiment, conductive heat
transfer is expected to dominate both convective and radiative
heat transfer (Heat Transfer Mechanism). Additionally, during
the ﬁrst 100 ms after contact, the heat would be expected to dif-
fuse throughout the glass substrate by a distance √αst ≈210 µm,
where αs is the thermal diffusivity of the substrate (Table S1).
Because this distance is much less than the millimeter thickness
of the glass and radius of the footprint, this early-time heat trans-
fer can be approximated as one-dimensional and semiinﬁnite.
After a pulse of energy, the surface temperature of a semi-
inﬁnite, one-dimensional substrate decays in time following the
classic self-similar equation
T(z = 0, t) −Ts =
Q
ksπr 2m
p
πt/αs
,
[1]
where ks is the thermal conductivity and πr 2
m is the contact area
over which the energy Q is deposited. For a drop bouncing on
a superhydrophobic surface, the energy transfer is not instanta-
neous; however, the residence time is signiﬁcantly shorter than
the subsequent temperature decay, so the heat transfer can be
estimated by ﬁtting Eq. 1 to the average surface temperature in
Fig. 2B (dotted line). For the drop shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the
estimated heat transferred is Q = 10 mJ.
Role of Drop Size and Temperature. To explore the physics under-
lying the ﬁnite-time heat transfer, we carry out a series of exper-
iments in which we systematically vary the drop size R and its
initial temperature Tℓ. In these experiments, we use water as
the liquid and soot-coated glass as the substrate. Additionally, we
adjust the impact velocityU to constrain the spreading factor to
a range between rm/R = 1.2 and 1.7. Repeating the steps illus-
trated in Figs. 1 and 2, we calculate the transferred heat Q for
varying drop sizes R and temperature differences ∆T = Tℓ−Ts
(Fig. 3). To illustrate the effect of the temperature difference
∆T on the transferred heat Q, the data in Fig. 3 are sepa-
rated into 10 ◦C increments, each of which is represented with
a different symbol orientation. Note that ∆T is negative when
cold drops, rather than hot drops, impact the superhydrophobic
surface. The high-speed optical images allow us to identify the
spreading factor rm/R for each drop, which are separated into
0.1 increments depicted with symbol color and contrast (Fig. 3).
As the temperature difference, drop size, and spreading factor
increase, the amount of heat transferred increases as well.
A key feature of bouncing drops on superhydrophobic and
superheated surfaces is the trapped gas or vapor under the drop.
If this gas layer acts as a thermal barrier, we might expect the
heat ﬂux to scale with an effective barrier thickness δ. For a given
spreading factor, this model would predict the amount of heat
transferred to scale as the conduction heat ﬂux across the bar-
rier ˙q ∼kg∆T/δ—where kg is the thermal conductivity of the
conﬁned gas layer—integrated over the contact area ∼R2 for
the duration of the residence time tr ∼(ρℓR3/γ)
1/2. Given the
importance of the air-ﬁlled microscale roughness on the super-
hydrophobicity, a natural scale for the thickness δ might be the
thickness of the superhydrophobic coating itself, which would not
vary with drop size or contact time. From a simple scaling per-
B
A
Fig. 3.
Measurements of heat transferred by drops. (A) The exchanged
heat Q varies with the drop size R; the temperature difference ∆T between
the drop and substrate (symbol orientation); and the extent of spreading,
or spreading factor, rm/R (symbol color). The black arrows illustrate drops
bouncing off of the substrate, leaving behind either a warm or cool foot-
print. (B) The data collapse into single curves for ﬁxed rm/R when the trans-
ferred heat Q is normalized by the initial temperature difference ∆T, show-
ing a power-law dependence on the drop radius R. Note that the larger
triangle corresponds to the speciﬁc drop illustrated in Fig. 2.
spective, integrating with a constant gap thickness would lead to
Q/∆T ∼(kg/δ)trR2 ∼(kg/δ)(.ρℓ/γ)0.5 R3.5.
An alternative hypothesis is that the trapped gas within the
superhydrophobic microtexture has a negligible inﬂuence on
the heat transfer and that the heat transfer is dominated by the
substrate below. In this case, the heat continues to propagate
downward into the substrate as the drop spreads and recoils;
the characteristic length is self-similar and grows as
√
αt. By
substituting this length into the heat ﬂux, we ﬁnd .Q/∆T ∼
(k/√αtr)trR2 ∼(k/√α)(ρℓ/γ)0.25R2.75. To evaluate this hy-
pothesis, the experimental results for the transferred heat Q
(Fig. 3A) are normalized by the temperature difference ∆T and
plotted over a logarithmic scale (Fig. 3B). The data collapse onto
a single curve and are more consistent with a power-law scaling
of R2.75 than R3.5.
It is also possible that the heat transfer is dictated by an air
cushion above the superhydrophobic surface and that this gap
depends on the radius R in such a way to produce a scaling con-
sistent with Fig. 3B. Speciﬁcally, research on the trapped air layer
over smooth surfaces (32) indicates that the cushion thickness
scales as δ ∼R(ρℓUR/µg)−2/3, where µg is the viscosity of the
air. For a ﬁxed spreading factor, the impact velocity scales as
6932
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700197114
Shiri and Bird
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.


--- PAGE 4 ---

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
U ∼γ/√ρR, so that Q/∆T ∼(kg/δ)trR2 ∼kg(ρℓγ/µ2
g)
1/3 R2.8.
It is noted that the thermal footprint does not reveal any direct
evidence of a dimple, such as a lower temperature in the cen-
ter; nevertheless, both the direct-contact and air-cushion mod-
els are consistent with the power-law relationship in Fig. 3B. To
adequately discern between these models, we rely on differing
predictions for the role of the underlying substrate. In particular,
the direct-contact model would be expected to depend on the
substrate thermal properties, and a more detailed analysis of this
dependence is developed in the next section.
Predicting the Amount of Exchanged Heat. The mechanism of
ﬁnite-time heat exchange between a drop and a superhydropho-
bic substrate in the absence of a gas layer and coating can be
modeled analytically. Here, we approximate the energy evolution
as one dimensional and consider conduction as the main mech-
anism of heat transfer (Heat Transfer Mechanism). If we model
the heat ﬂux ˙q(t) and contact radius r(t) as decoupled, then the
total heat transferred by a single drop over a residence time tr
can be estimated as Q =
R tr
0 ˙q(t)πr(t)2dt. The contact radius ini-
tially spreads to a maximum radius before retracting back to zero.
These spreading and retraction dynamics can be approximated
(1) using the relation r(t) = 2rm
q
t/tr −(t/tr)2.
To calculate the heat ﬂux ˙q(t), we model the drop and sub-
strate as two semiinﬁnite bodies at different initial temperatures,
Tℓfor the liquid and Ts for the substrate, that are brought into
contact and achieve temperature equality at the contact surface,
T(z = 0, t) (Fig. 4A). For conduction-dominated heat transfer,
this semiinﬁnite approximation is appropriate when the thermal
diffusion length √αtr is less than the thickness of the material.
Provided that the drop does not spread too thinly, this condi-
tion is met for both the drop and the substrate during their rapid
contact.
By imposing the condition that the two bodies have an
equal contact temperature during contact time, the standard
heat equation can be solved analytically (33), revealing a
time-independent contact surface temperature of T(z = 0, t) =
 p
(kρcp)ℓTℓ+
p
(kρcp)sTs
 p
(kρcp)ℓ+
p
(kρcp)s

. Here
cp is the speciﬁc heat and the subscripts s and ℓdenote the prop-
erties of the substrate and liquid, respectively. It follows from
the self-similar analysis that the heat ﬂux into the substrate is
˙q(t) = ks(Ts −T(z = 0, t))/√παst. Combining the relations for
the heat ﬂux and the contact radius, the amount of heat trans-
ferred Q =
R tr
0 ˙q(t)πr(t)2dt is
Q = 2.8
ksρℓ
1/4(rm/R)2∆T
γ1/4√αs

1 +
p
(ρcpk)s/(ρcpk)ℓ
R11/4.
[2]
From a scaling perspective, Eq. 2 is equivalent to the relation
Q/∆T ∼R2.75 presented in the previous section and thus also
consistent with the data in Fig. 3A. However, in addition to pro-
viding a coefﬁcient, Eq. 2 also provides falsiﬁable predictions
into how the spreading factor and material properties of the liq-
uid and the substrate affect the heat transferred.
A natural way to nondimensionalize the transferred heat Q is
to normalize it by the maximum possible heat transfer mcp∆T,
where m is a drop mass. Noting that m = 4
3πR3ρℓ, the normal-
ized heat exchange can be expressed as
Q
mcp∆T = 0.7
rm
R
2 
1
1 + M
 ρℓα2
ℓ
Rγ
1/4
.
[3]
In this form, it becomes clear that for a given spreading fac-
tor, the model predicts that the fraction of potential heat trans-
ferred is controlled by two dimensionless parameters: one relat-
ing the thermal-inertial capillary dynamics of the drop ρℓα2
ℓ/Rγ
and the other relating the thermal properties of the material
M = kℓ√αs/ks√αℓ.
Experiments
A
B
Fig. 4.
Comparison between model and experiment. (A) The model
assumes that during the residence time tr, the temperatures of the drop
Tℓand solid Ts contact along a plane z = 0 and the heat transfer leads
to self-similar temperature proﬁles T(z, t). (B) For a given spreading fac-
tor rm/R (symbol color), the portion of energy exchanged depends on two
dimensionless groups, one based on dynamic properties ρℓα2
ℓ/Rγ and the
other on material thermal properties M (symbol shape). The experimental
data (symbols) are consistent with the theoretical results with rm/R = 1.4
(solid lines).
The ﬁrst dimensionless group identiﬁed in our analysis,
ρℓα2
ℓ/Rγ, may be interpreted as the square of the ratio of
residence time tr ∼
p
ρℓR3/γ to the thermal diffusion time
td ∼R2/αℓ. For millimeter water drops, ρℓα2
ℓ/Rγ is of the order
of 10−7, which implies that the drop bounces ∼2,000 times faster
than the time needed for the heat to thermally diffuse across the
drop. The stark difference in timescales supports the semiinﬁ-
nite approximation. Furthermore, the scaling highlights the com-
peting inﬂuence of drop size. A larger drop will have a longer
residence time than a smaller drop; yet the increase in diffu-
sion time is greater and therefore the ratio of these timescales
tr/td decreases. These two timescales become comparable for
sufﬁciently small drops; yet for water, this size is less than a
nanometer or near the molecular scale. Therefore, we would
expect ρℓα2
ℓ/Rγ ≪1 for most water drops and comparable
liquids.
The other control parameter identiﬁed in our analysis is
the material factor deﬁned as M = kℓ√αs/ks√αℓ. This factor
relates the thermal heat transfer between the liquid and the sub-
strate and therefore depends solely on the thermal properties of
these two materials. If the substrate transfers heat signiﬁcantly
faster than the drop, then the heat transfer is rate limited by the
drop and M →0; whereas if the substrate transfers heat slower
than the drop, then the heat transfer is rate limited by the sub-
strate and M →∞. For a water drop on a glass substrate, the
relative heat transfer rates are comparable and M = 1.
The experimental results illustrated in Fig. 3 are rescaled in
terms of the dimensionless groups presented in Eq. 3 alongside
the theoretical prediction for a spreading factor of rm/R = 1.4
Shiri and Bird
PNAS
|
July 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 27
|
6933
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.


--- PAGE 5 ---

(Fig. 4B). The theoretical model is able to predict not only the
scaling trend in the data, but also the prefactor; both exper-
iment and model indicate that ∼1% of the available heat is
exchanged during the bounce of a millimeter-sized water drop
on a superhydrophobic-coated glass substrate. Additionally, as
the spreading factor rm/R is increased, holding the other param-
eters constant, the amount of heat transferred increases as well,
as predicted in the model.
Returning to the two potential models proposed earlier, the
direct-contact model depends on the substrate thermal proper-
ties, whereas the air-cushion model does not. Speciﬁcally, the
model predicts that less heat would be exchanged by the bounc-
ing water drop if the glass substrate were replaced by more insu-
lating materials, such as synthetic rubber (M = 2.6) or natural
wood (M = 4.2). To test this prediction, we repeat the experi-
mental procedure with neoprene rubber and pine wood instead
of glass. The measured thermal properties of these materials are
provided in Table S1. A thin superhydrophobic layer of soot is
coated on the rubber and wood substrates following the same pro-
cedure used for the glass substrate. Thus, the superhydrophobic
surfaces in all samples were identical, whereas the underlying sub-
strates differed. Experimental data for heated water drops bounc-
ing on the rubber (square symbols) and wood (circle symbols) are
plotted along with the theoretical predictions (Fig. 4B). The
results conﬁrm that the substrate material—even under a layer
of soot—affects the amount of heat exchanged Q during the drop
bounce, providing evidence for the direct-contact model.
An interesting feature of the direct-contact model is that,
counterintuitively, a smaller drop can transfer a larger fraction
of its potential heat than a larger drop even though the smaller
drop is in contact with the surface for less time (Fig. 4B). This
result is a consequence of the self-similar conductive heat trans-
fer into the drop and substrate. Indeed, the opposite trend—
larger drops transferring a larger fraction of potential heat—
would be expected if the heat transfer was regulated by a layer of
trapped gas with a ﬁxed depth. These trends are further compli-
cated if the spreading factor rm/R also varies. Nevertheless, our
ﬁndings taken at a constant spreading factor (Fig. 4B) illustrate
an important concept: Smaller drops may contact the surface for
a shorter time than larger drops, yet during this time, the smaller
drop encounters a larger average heat ﬂux from the self-similar
conduction.
Cooling from Multiple Drops. Although the focus of this paper has
been on the heat exchange of individual drops, most applications
involve multiple drops. For example, many birds have feathers
that are superhydrophobic (7, 21); however, exposure to cold rain
can adversely cool a bird (34, 35) and in extreme cases has been
linked to hypothermia and death (36, 37).
Our results measuring the small fraction of potential heat
exchanged with a drop on a superhydrophobic surface (Fig. 4)
suggest that a solid body would be noticeably warmer throughout
a cold shower if drops rapidly bounced off the surface rather than
becoming stuck. Additionally, these results suggest that at the
same ﬂow rate, the bouncing of smaller drops would exchange
more heat than that of larger drops, provided that the spreading
factor for the smaller drops was similar to or greater than that of
the larger drops.
To evaluate these predictions, we measure the temperature T
on the underside of a suspended duck feather on top of which a
steady stream of drops impacts. These feathers (Fig. 5A) have
a barb and barbule microtexture (Fig. 5B) that enables their
natural superhydrophobicity. We compare identical experiments
on a feather that is superhydrophobic and a feather that has
been made superhydrophilic through plasma irradiation (38) and
indeed ﬁnd that the undersides of feathers are warmer when cold
droplets bounce rather than stick (Fig. S3).
A superhydrophobic feather can also be used to explore
the extent that drop size might affect the amount of heat
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 5.
Cooling from different-sized drops impacting at ambient tempera-
ture onto a warmed feather. (A) A photograph of a gray duck pennaceous
feather used in the experiments. (B) A scanning electron microscope image
reveals the interlocking barb and barbule microtexture that is responsible
for the natural superhydrophobicity of the feather. (C) High-speed images
show the two different-sized streams of water drops at identical ﬂow rates
bounce off of the top surface of the feather. (D) A heat map illustrates the
temperature underneath the warmed feather averaged over a 100-s period.
During this period, the two streams of ambient-temperature water drops
that bounce on the top side of the feather lead, on the bottom side, to local
cooling. The circles denote the location of the stream of large drops (left),
the stream of small drops (right), and a midpoint in which there are no drops
(center). (E) The temperature within each of these circled regions is plotted
for 10 s before the start of the experiment, as well as 2 min during which
the drops steadily drip on the top side of the feather. Insets highlight the
periodicity of the temperature response on the side of the feather opposite
to where the drops impact. Here the time between each falling water drop
is 2 s for the large drops and 0.3 s for the small drops.
transferred. To explore this possibility, two streams of drops
were released simultaneously, one larger (R ≈2 mm) and
one smaller (R ≈1.1 mm), with identical ﬂow rates 1 mL/min
and similar spreading factors rm/R ≈1.3 and 1.7, respec-
tively (Fig. 5C). Here the drops were at the ambient lab-
oratory temperature 26 ◦C, whereas the feather was heated
to 40 ◦C, the approximate body temperature of a bird (39)
(Fig. S4).
A time-averaged thermal image from below the feather (Fig.
5D) reveals that the regions under which the large and small
drops fall are indeed cooler than the surrounding regions, even
though the drops are the same temperature as the ambient air
on the top side of the feather. The locations under which the
drops fall, as well the midpoint between these two locations,
are denoted with black circles in Fig. 5D. The average temper-
ature within these circled regions varies with time (Fig. 5E).
Before the experiment begins (t < 0), the temperature within
these three regions is indistinguishable. As drops bounce off the
feather, the midpoint temperature remains steady whereas the
temperature on the opposite side from where the drops fall cools.
These temperatures ﬂuctuate, with the region associated with the
smaller drop having a lower average temperature than that of the
larger drop.
6934
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1700197114
Shiri and Bird
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.


--- PAGE 6 ---

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
ECOLOGY
Closer inspection of these temperature ﬂuctuations reveals
that they are periodic (Fig. 5E, Insets). Indeed, the period of
2 s for the large drops and 0.3 s for the small drops corre-
sponds precisely with the time interval between the dripping of
the large and small drops, respectively, providing additional evi-
dence that the cooling corresponds to the droplet bounce events.
Although the cooling from these drops might seem insigniﬁcant,
it should be noted that the ambient temperature and water drops
are relatively warm (T ≈26 ◦C). More signiﬁcant temperature
drops would be expected in colder conditions. Indeed, identical
experiments conducted outdoors in colder weather (T ≈3.9 ◦C)
resulted in signiﬁcantly greater cooling when the drops bounced
on the heated, superhydrophobic feather (Fig. S5).
Conclusion
The ﬁndings presented in this study add insight into the ﬁnite-
time heat transfer that occurs when a hot or cold drop bounces
on a superhydrophobic substrate. We demonstrate experimen-
tally and theoretically that a small fraction of available heat is
exchanged when a water drop impacts and bounces off a super-
hydrophobic substrate and that the heat can be modeled as being
directly exchanged with the solid substrate. A consequence of
this direct exchange is that a greater fraction of available heat is
exchanged for smaller than for larger drops, even though larger
drops are in contact with the surface for a longer period. Equally
signiﬁcant is the role of the substrate material in the amount
of heat exchanged. We highlight how such principles extend to
a more general case of multiple bouncing drops and identify
dimensionless parameters that can guide the design of nonwet-
ting materials for which heat exchange with impacting drops may
be a factor, such as weather-related fabrics. In the context of
avian hypothermia associated with cold rain, past work has indi-
cated that feather water repellency mitigates evaporative cooling
(40); our results highlight another important mechanism associ-
ated with this process: direct heat exchange with the rain itself.
Materials and Methods
Experimental
Methodology. High-speed
images
are
captured
using
a
Photron camera with a frame rate of 10,000 frames per second and a
200-mm Nikon lens. A ﬁber-optic light source provides cool, high-intensity
light to the samples during high-speed imaging. Thermographic images are
simultaneously recorded with a thermal camera at a frame rate of 200
frames per second with a close-up IR lens. To control the water tempera-
ture, a water bath is connected to a syringe that can eject a single drop on
demand. The drop velocity is controlled by varying the height of the needle
above the substrate. Velocity adjustments are made to limit the range of
the spreading factor rm/R. In the cooling from the multiple-drops experi-
ments, the feather is suspended by using a stand and clamp. The top of the
feather is subjected to two sets of water drops released from two different
sizes of needles. A constant ﬂow rate for both sets of drops is maintained
with a dual syringe pump. Finally, a heat gun is used to heat the feather
from below.
Substrate Material Characterization. To measure the heat capacity of the
substrate material, thermal analysis is conducted with a Q2000 differential
scanning calorimeter (DSC). The DSC sample measurements are referenced
against pure indium metal and evaluated over a range of 15−45 ◦C, follow-
ing standard procedures (41). The heat capacity and density of glass, rubber,
and wood are measured experimentally and the thermal conductivity values
are obtained from the literature (42–44).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank J. Goldfarb for assistance in measuring the
thermal properties of the solids and K. Varanasi, E. Wang, and F. Brasz for
commenting on the manuscript. S.S. acknowledges partial support from the
Boston University Dean’s Catalyst Award.
1. Leon Bolle JCM (1982) Spray cooling of hot surfaces. Multiphas Sci Tech 1:1–97.
2. Kim J (2007) Spray cooling heat transfer: The state of the art. Int J Heat Fluid Flow
28:753–767.
3. Deng W, Gomez A (2011) Electrospray cooling for microelectronics. Int J Heat Mass
Tran 54:2270–2275.
4. Pikkula BM, Torres JH, Tunnell JW, Anvari B (2001) Cryogen spray cooling: Effects of
droplet size and spray density on heat removal. Laser Surg Med 28:103–112.
5. Thomas SK, Cassoni RP, MacArthur CD (1996) Aircraft anti-icing and de-icing tech-
niques and modeling. J Aircraft 33:841–854.
6. McLoughlin E, McGuire A (1990) The causes, cost, and prevention of childhood burn
injuries. Am J Dis Child 144:677–683.
7. Kennedy R (1970) Directional water-shedding properties of feathers. Nature 227:
736–737.
8. Voigt CC, Schneeberger K, Voigt-Heucke SL, Lewanzik D (2011) Rain increases the
energy cost of bat ﬂight. Biol Lett 7:793–795.
9. Mishchenko L, et al. (2010) Design of ice-free nanostructured surfaces based on repul-
sion of impacting water droplets. ACS Nano 4:7699–7707.
10. Patterson CJ, Shiri S, Bird JC (2017) Macrotextured spoked surfaces reduce the resi-
dence time of a bouncing Leidenfrost drop. J Phys Condens Matter 29:064007.
11. Golovin K, et al. (2016) Designing durable icephobic surfaces. Sci Adv 2:e1501496.
12. Burton J, Sharpe A, van der Veen R, Franco A, Nagel S (2012) Geometry of the vapor
layer under a Leidenfrost drop. Phys Rev Lett 109:074301.
13. Shirota M, van Limbeek MA, Sun C, Prosperetti A, Lohse D (2016) Dynamic Leidenfrost
effect: Relevant time and length scales. Phys Rev Lett 116:064501.
14. Leidenfrost JG (1966) On the ﬁxation of water in diverse ﬁre. Int J Heat Mass Tran
9:1153–1166.
15. Khavari M, Sun C, Lohse D, Tran T (2015) Fingering patterns during droplet impact on
heated surfaces. Soft Matter 11:3298–3303.
16. Guo Y, Mishima K (2002) A non-equilibrium mechanistic heat transfer model for post-
dryout dispersed ﬂow regime. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 26:861–869.
17. Gradeck M, Seiler N, Ruyer P, Maillet D (2013) Heat transfer for Leidenfrost drops
bouncing onto a hot surface. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 47:14–25.
18. van Limbeek MA, et al. (2016) Vapour cooling of poorly conducting hot substrates
increases the dynamic Leidenfrost temperature. Int J Heat Mass Tran 97:101–109.
19. Bird JC, Mandre S, Stone HA (2008) Short-time dynamics of partial wetting. Phys Rev
Lett 100:234501.
20. Duez C, Ybert C, Clanet C, Bocquet L (2010) Wetting controls separation of inertial
ﬂows from solid surfaces. Phys Rev Lett 104:084503.
21. Cassie A, Baxter S (1944) Wettability of porous surfaces. Trans Faraday Soc 40:
546–551.
22. Koishi T, Yasuoka K, Fujikawa S, Ebisuzaki T, Zeng XC (2009) Coexistence and tran-
sition between Cassie and Wenzel state on pillared hydrophobic surface. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 106:8435–8440.
23. Richard D, Clanet C, Qu´er´e D (2002) Surface phenomena: Contact time of a bouncing
drop. Nature 417:811.
24. Lee C, et al. (2015) Two types of Cassie-to-Wenzel wetting transitions on superhy-
drophobic surfaces during drop impact. Soft Matter 11:4592–4599.
25. Mandre S, Mani M, Brenner MP (2009) Precursors to splashing of liquid droplets on a
solid surface. Phys Rev Lett 102:134502.
26. van der Veen RC, Tran T, Lohse D, Sun C (2012) Direct measurements of air layer
proﬁles under impacting droplets using high-speed color interferometry. Phys Rev E
85:026315.
27. Li E, Thoroddsen ST (2015) Time-resolved imaging of a compressible air disc under a
drop impacting on a solid surface. J Fluid Mech 780:636–648.
28. Clanet C, B´eguin C, Richard D, Qu´er´e D (2004) Maximal deformation of an impacting
drop. J Fluid Mech 517:199–208.
29. Tran T, Staat HJ, Prosperetti A, Sun C, Lohse D (2012) Drop impact on superheated
surfaces. Phys Rev Lett 108:036101.
30. Reyssat M, Richard D, Clanet C, Qu´er´e D (2010) Dynamical superhydrophobicity. Fara-
day Discuss 146:19–33.
31. Bird JC, Dhiman R, Kwon HM, Varanasi KK (2013) Reducing the contact time of a
bouncing drop. Nature 503:385–388.
32. Li J, et al. (2016) Oil droplet self-transportation on oleophobic surfaces. Sci Adv
2:e1600148.
33. Bergman TL, Incropera FP, DeWitt DP, Lavine AS (2011) Fundamentals of Heat and
Mass Transfer (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ), 7th Ed.
34. Webb D, King J (1984) Effects of wetting of insulation of bird and mammal coats. J
Therm Biol 9:189–191.
35. Wilson GR, Cooper SJ, Gessaman JA (2004) The effects of temperature and artiﬁcial
rain on the metabolism of American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Comp Biochem Physiol
A Mol Integr Physiol 139:389–394.
36. Odum EP, Pitelka FA (1939) Storm mortality in a winter starling roost. Auk 56:
451–455.
37. Kennedy R (1970) Direct effects of rain on birds: A review. Br Birds 63:401–414.
38. Bormashenko E, Grynyov R (2012) Plasma treatment induced wetting transitions on
biological tissue (pigeon feathers). Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 92:367–371.
39. Prinzinger R, Pressmar A, Schleucher E (1991) Body temperature in birds. Comp
Biochem Physiol A Physiol 99:499–506.
40. Lustick S, Adams J (1977) Seasonal variation in the effects of wetting on the energetics
and survival of starlings (Sturnus vulgaris). Comp Biochem Physiol A Comp Physiol
56:173–177.
41. Goldfarb JL, K ¨ulaots I (2010) Melting points and enthalpies of fusion of anthracene
and its heteroatomic counterparts. J Therm Anal Calorim 102:1063–1070.
42. Avallone EA, Baumeister T, III, Sadegh AM (2006) Marks’ Standard Handbook for
Mechanical Engineers (McGraw-Hill, New York), 11th Ed.
43. Ross RJ, et al. (2010) Wood Handbook: Wood as an Engineering Material (US Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI), Cen-
tennial Ed.
44. Perry RH, Green D, Maloney J (1997) Perry’s Handbook of Chemical Engineering
(McGraw-Hill, New York), 7th Ed.
Shiri and Bird
PNAS
|
July 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 27
|
6935
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.30.172.63 on June 24, 2025 from IP address 92.30.172.63.
