

--- PAGE 1 ---

PAPER
CRIMINALISTICS
Nima Behrooz,1 B.Sc.; Lee Hulse-Smith,2 M.S.; and Sanjeev Chandra,1 Ph.D.
An Evaluation of the Underlying Mechanisms
of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis Error
ABSTRACT:
An experiment was designed to explore the underlying mechanisms of blood disintegration and its subsequent effect on area of
origin (AO) calculations. Blood spatter patterns were created through the controlled application of pressurized air (20–80 kPa) for 0.1 msec onto sus-
pended blood droplets (2.7–3.2 mm diameter). The resulting disintegration process was captured using high-speed photography. Straight-line triangu-
lation resulted in a 50% height overestimation, whereas using the lowest calculated height for each spatter pattern reduced this error to 8%.
Incorporation of projectile motion resulted in a 28% height underestimation. The AO xy-coordinate was found to be very accurate with a maximum
offset of only 4 mm, while AO size calculations were found to be two- to fivefold greater than expected. Subsequently, reverse triangulation analysis
revealed the rotational offset for 26% of stains could not be attributed to measurement error, suggesting that some portion of error is inherent in the
disintegration process.
KEYWORDS: forensic science, bloodstain pattern analysis, fluid dynamics, blood
Measurements taken from bloodstain spatter patterns at a crime
scene can be utilized to calculate the associated bloodshed area of
origin (AO) within a three-dimensional space. Generally, this
involves the resolution of individual spatter patterns, selection of
suitable bloodstains within, resolution of impact direction, stain tri-
angulation to yield a two-dimensional area of convergence, and
finally overlaying this with the third dimension, height, by calculat-
ing bloodstain impact angles via the Balthazard formula (1). Once
determined, the AO can prove useful in reconstructing the events
surrounding bloodshed. Research examining the accuracy and
underlying mechanisms of this methodology is still incomplete.
Within the bloodstain pattern analysis (BPA) community, varia-
tion exists in methodologies used for pattern recognition, velocity
categorization, stain selection, and stain measurement. Despite this
variation, there is a strong scientific foundation for correlations
between certain stain morphology parameters and the AO. These
include impact directionality through the presence of one or more
spines, triangulation using the long axis (l) of multiple stain ellip-
ses, and the angle of impact using the ratio of the long axis (l) to
short axis (w) through application of the Balthazard formula (Eq.
[1]). By combining all three parameters, the final AO can be estab-
lished within a three-dimensional space (2).
sin h ¼ w
l
ð1Þ
As projectile motion has proven difficult to incorporate into AO
modeling, straight-line flight paths are assumed with the inherent
limitation that the z-coordinate will be consistently overestimated.
In response, the BPA community recommends presenting the AO
z-coordinate as a maximum height calculation (3).
With a few exceptions (1,4), research into BPA error rates typi-
cally utilize a mock crime scene approach, or focus on individual
passive droplets (5–11). Researchers employing a mock crime
scene approach are usually attempting to replicate the conditions of
a specific criminal case. This can only provide a rough estimate of
AO error, because the experiments are highly variable and difficult
to control. To establish greater control, researchers have turned to
the study of passive droplets, which usually involves individual
blood droplets of a standard size made to fall under the influence
of gravity alone. However, this approach is limited to investigating
the error associated with the AO z-coordinate component, because
triangulation of multiple stains within a spatter pattern is required
to evaluate the AO size and xy-coordinate.
This currently limits any complete evaluation of the AO to the
mock crime scene approach. The consequence of which makes it
very difficult to explore the underlying mechanisms related to error.
Take for example a typical experiment where some force (hand,
baseball bat, firearm projectile) is applied to some blood source
(blood-soaked sponge, pool of blood). Subsequently, AO is triangu-
lated from the resulting spatter pattern and compared with the
known AO. With the exception of z-coordinate overestimation
resulting from straight-line triangulation, it would be tempting to
conclude that any observed error must be related to the analyst’s
measurement technique. This overlooks an important variable, high-
lighted in Fig. 1. Each frame represents a 10-msec interval follow-
ing the impact of a hammer on a pool of blood. This series of
high-speed photographs represents one in a series of disintegration
events captured by Taylor et al., available online (http://www.
ameslab.gov/mfrc/rd) (12). It is clear from these images that a num-
ber of complex fluid dynamic events are present. Therefore, it
seems reasonable to speculate that some degree of AO error might
be related to blood displacement and disintegration from an often
complicated and variable collision.
1Departmental of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of
Toronto, 5 King’s College Road, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G8, Canada.
2Centre of Forensic Sciences, 25 Grosvenor Street, Toronto, Ontario M7A
2G8, Canada.
Received 18 May 2010; and in revised form 2 Sept. 2010; accepted 11
Sept. 2010.
J Forensic Sci, September 2011, Vol. 56, No. 5
doi: 10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x
Available online at: onlinelibrary.wiley.com
1136
 2011 American Academy of Forensic Sciences


--- PAGE 2 ---

Research into the dynamics of fluids other than blood offers
some insight into this complex interaction (13–15). It begins when
an object strikes a liquid source, transferring energy through com-
pression and forcing liquid displacement away from the strike
point. The amount of transferred energy will correlate with the
degree of fluid displacement. As the liquid undergoes displacement,
the ratio of surface area to volume increases. To counter this insta-
bility, the displaced liquid will either recoil through counteracting
surface tension forces or disintegrate into smaller fragments where
the energy is great enough. Ultimately, aerodynamic forces govern
droplet size. The higher the velocity of blood displacement, the
greater the instability created at the liquid–gas interface, resulting
in the generation of smaller droplets. This provides some support
for the current correlations made within the BPA community
between bloodstain size and droplet velocity. Liquid displacement
is quite complex, however, and not all of the liquid will be travel-
ing at the same velocity. This could result in a variety of droplet
sizes, in addition to the generation of sheets and filaments. As
blood has a relatively high viscosity when compared to water, this
increased resistance to flow will counteract displacement and
increase the probability of encountering sheets and filaments, as
readily observed in Fig. 1. Unlike droplets, sheets and filaments are
inherently unstable because of their higher surface area-to-volume
ratio and will either recoil into a single droplet or further disinte-
grate into multiple droplets.
Once airborne, droplet flight trajectory is governed by the effects
of gravity and drag (or air resistance). Gravity results in downward
droplet acceleration and can be modeled using the following pro-
jectile motion equations:
yðtÞ ¼  1
2 gt2 þ voyt þ yo
ð2Þ
vyðtÞ ¼ gt þ voy
ð3Þ
ayðtÞ ¼ g
ð4Þ
vxðtÞ ¼ vox ¼ vo cos ho
ð5Þ
xðtÞ ¼ vxot þ xo
ð6Þ
axðtÞ ¼ 0
ð7Þ
tan h ¼ vy
vx
ð8Þ
The force applied to the body of a droplet in motion by the sur-
rounding air is called drag and acts in the opposite direction of
droplet motion. The value of drag force can be calculated using the
following equation:
FDrag ¼ CD
1
2 qairV2 p
4 D2




ð9Þ
where q is the fluid density, V is the flow velocity, and D is the
droplet diameter. CD is the coefficient of drag, which is a function
of Reynolds number and depends on the shape of the object. The
Reynolds number for a sphere is defined as:
Re ¼ qDoVo
l
ð10Þ
where D is the droplet diameter, and l is the fluid viscosity.
The aim of this research was to utilize a novel experimental
design to investigate the error associated with the standard calcula-
tions for AO. Starting with a mock crime scene experimental
approach, the initial volume of blood was significantly reduced,
and the disintegration process was propagated through the applica-
tion of a short burst of pressurized air. These two modifications
allowed for better resolution of the disintegration process to provide
a window into the underlying mechanisms responsible for AO
error.
Materials and Methods
A gas tank filled with pressurized air was connected to a nozzle
via stainless steel tubing. A pressure gauge was used to measure
air pressure, while a solenoid valve with digital pulse generator
ensured a controlled release of air from the nozzle. This apparatus
was contained within an aluminum frame structure to allow for ver-
tical adjustment. Iron plates secured to the structure ensured it
would not move during operation. A diagram of this experimental
setup is shown in Fig. 2.
A syringe, mounted within a syringe pump to regulate flow rate,
was connected to a stainless steel needle using clear plastic tubing.
The syringe and needle were clamped within the apparatus such
that a droplet suspended from the needle would be directly within
the path of pressurized air released from the nozzle. Pig blood was
chosen owing to similarities in physical properties with human
blood. The reader is directed to our previous article for additional
information regarding these properties (10).
Fresh pig blood was obtained from an abattoir (Quality Meat
Packers, Toronto, Ontario, Canada) and stored in test tubes contain-
ing the anticoagulant ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). The
blood was stored at 4C and was used within 48 h of collection.
Blood was placed into the syringe pump, which was then utilized
to deliver a specific volume of blood, resulting in consistent sized
blood droplets suspended from the needle tip. Droplet diameter was
measured directly from the high-speed images taken immediately
prior to disintegration, using the needle diameter as a calibration
reference. Blood droplet and needle diameters are shown in
Table 1. While these are the same needles used in our previous
1.
2.
3.
4.
FIG. 1—High-speed photographs of a hammer impacting a pool of blood.
Images are numbered according to increasing time intervals of 10 msec
(http://www.ameslab.gov/mfrc/rd) (12).
BEHROOZ ET AL.
• UNDERLYING MECHANISMS OF BPA ERROR
1137
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 3 ---

research (10), the droplet diameters generated here have been
reduced to prevent droplet detachment under gravity prior to the
application of pressurized air.
The pulse generator was set to allow air release from the nozzle
for 0.1 msec. This resulted in complete separation of the blood
droplet from the needle and subsequent disintegration into smaller
droplets. A FastCam-Ultima 1024 high-speed video camera (Pho-
tron, Tokyo, Japan) was used to capture the disintegration of drop-
lets from the syringe needle at 1000 frames per second. The
camera was positioned 0.5 m from the droplet such that it could
capture disintegration from a side view. A light source was placed
1.5 m from the droplet on the opposite side to optimize image con-
trast. The camera was connected to the pulse generator to synchro-
nize image capture with air release from the nozzle.
The initial velocity of projected droplets was obtained by mea-
suring the distance traveled by individual droplets between each
frame of the high-speed camera images. The known needle diame-
ter was used for calibration. The resulting blood spatter pattern was
captured on standard white printing paper positioned 86 mm below
the nozzle. The AO xy-coordinate was marked on the paper prior
to each experimental run by releasing a single droplet from the
needle and allowing it to impact on the paper. Bloodstains were
allowed to dry prior to digital conversion via a high-resolution
scanner. All digital measurements were conducted using either the
ImageJ (U.S. National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD) or Adobe
Illustrator (Adobe, San Jose, CA) imaging software.
The experiment was conducted using two different needle sizes
(to vary droplet diameter) and four different air pressures (to vary
impact velocity). Each experiment was replicated three times,
resulting in the generation of 24 blood spatter patterns. Where
applicable, data comparison was undertaken using Neyman–Pearson
statistical testing with a 95% confidence interval.
Results and Discussion
Figures 3 and 4 show a side-by-side comparison of two blood
droplets undergoing disintegration. The two columns represent dif-
ferent applied air pressures (20 and 40 kPa). Droplet diameter was
kept constant at 3.2 mm. The images show the process of disinte-
gration over 25 msec following the application of pressurized air
onto the droplet for 0.1 msec.
At time zero, the droplets can be seen adhering to the needle tip,
representing the known AO. At 3 msec, the pressurized air has
already been applied and sheets, filaments, and individual droplets
can be seen radiating from the AO. At 5 msec, small droplets
c. 0.5 mm in diameter are moving away from the AO at
c. 6 m⁄sec. These are byproducts of the initial pressurized air
flowing over the liquid surface, causing sufficient instability to pro-
duce droplets of this size.
At 10 msec, the 40 kPa air pressure is associated with the gener-
ation of more droplets than the 20 kPa air pressure. At both pres-
sures, a substantial volume of blood can still be observed close to
the AO. By 20 msec, this volume of blood has begun to stabilize
into droplets c. 1–1.5 mm in diameter traveling away from the AO
at a relatively low velocity of c. 1 m⁄sec. By 25 msec, only larger
droplets and a few filaments remain.
The resulting 24 spatter patterns exhibited similar characteristics.
Figure 5 represents a 0.2 · 0.2 m portion of one spatter pattern.
Each spatter pattern was comprised of c. 200 stains covering an
area of about 1.1 · 0.2 m. Of these stains, about 75% were
1
2
4
3
7
6
5
8
9
10
FIG. 2—Experimental setup: (1) Compressed air cylinder, (2) Pressure
regulators, (3) Syringe and syringe pump, (4) Pressure gauge, (5) Pulse
generator, (6) Solenoid valve, (7) High-speed camera, (8) Nozzle, (9) Nee-
dle, (10) Blood droplet.
TABLE 1—Droplet diameter was measured from high-speed photographs
taken 0.5 msec prior to droplet disintegration. Image calibration was
performed using the needle outer diameter.
Syringe Needle
Droplet Diameter
(mm)
Gauge
Inner Diameter
(mm)
Outer Diameter
(mm)
12
2.8
2.2
3.2 € 0.11 (n = 4)
17
1.5
1.1
2.7 € 0.13 (n = 6)
t = 0msec
t = 2msec
t = 3msec
t = 5msec
Droplet Diameter = 3.2mm
Pressure = 20kPa
Pressure = 40kPa
FIG. 3—High-speed photograph time-series comparing the blood droplet
disintegration process following application of 20 and 40 kPa pressurized
air for 0.1 msec. Droplet diameter was kept constant at 3.2 mm. Needle
diameter, which is marked with a white calibration line in the top left
image, is 2.8 mm. This time-series continues in Fig. 4.
1138
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 4 ---

<0.5 mm diameter with no indication of directionality. This left
between 30 and 60 stains per spatter pattern, which could yield
directionality, with elliptical short axis ranging between 0.5 and
6 mm. Stain selection and measurements were based on the criteria
outlined by Wells (16). These included:
• Well-formed stains
• Angle of impact <60
• Equal number of stains from each side of the spatter pattern
• Within 50% of distance from the furthest stain
• Approximately 20 stains
Unfortunately for each spatter pattern, after applying the first
four criteria listed above, only 8–12 stains were deemed suitable.
The z-coordinate (height) was calculated using the Balthazard for-
mula based on the long and short axis of a best-fit ellipse overlayed
within the ImageJ software, as demonstrated in Fig. 6. Care was
taken when fitting each ellipse to account for the asymmetrical nat-
ure of each bloodstain (16). The long axis was subsequently
extracted from each ellipse and then scaled to provide triangulation
lines back to the AO. For the purposes of triangulation, this method
prevented any measurement bias as the long axis was determined
while zoomed into the digital image for each stain, thereby hiding
the known AO.
Figure 7 highlights the error associated with the z-coordinate for
each starting blood droplet diameter and applied air pressure. With
a known z-coordinate of 86 mm, these results show an average
overestimation of 43 mm (50% error), with a range of 16–64 mm.
No statistically significant relationship was found between the
degree of z-coordinate offset and either air pressure or droplet size.
These overestimations were expected given that straight-line trian-
gulation does not account for projectile motion and drag. As a
result, two alternative methods for estimating the z-coordinate were
explored. The first examines the accuracy of reporting the lowest
z-coordinate as a best estimate calculation. The second explores
whether projectile motion and drag could be incorporated into AO
modeling.
As straight-line triangulation consistently overestimates the z-
coordinate, the lowest z-coordinate measurement for each spatter
pattern was considered as a potential alternative. The results of this
approach are shown in Fig. 8. The average overestimation was
reduced from 43 to 7 mm (8% error) with a range between )10
and 29 mm. In a few cases, the lowest z-coordinate resulted in an
underestimation. As using straight lines to estimate z-coordinate
should always result in an overestimation, we attribute this to mea-
surement error. As a result, if this method is utilized in casework,
it should be reported as a best estimate and not as a maximum
height calculation. It should also be noted that it will be impossible
to determine the variation around this best estimate because this
approach only utilizes a single point.
Next, projectile motion and drag were explored to determine
whether they might be utilized to reduce z-coordinate error. The
following projectile motion equations were derived.
t = 10msec
t = 15msec
t = 20msec
t = 25msec
Droplet Diameter = 3.2mm
Pressure = 20kPa
Pressure = 40kPa
FIG. 4—High-speed photograph time-series continued from Fig. 3.
FIG. 5—A 0.2 · 0.2 m section of one blood spatter. The area of origin is
located 0.31 m from the bottom edge of this section. Applied air pressure
was 80 kPa and droplet diameter was 3.2 mm.
FIG. 6—A bloodstain shown on the right with its best-fit ellipse on the
left.
BEHROOZ ET AL.
• UNDERLYING MECHANISMS OF BPA ERROR
1139
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 5 ---

From Eqs (3), (5), and (8), the time of flight can be solved
tan h ¼
gt
vo cos ho
or
t ¼ tan hvo cos ho
g
ð11Þ
then substitute Eq. (11) into Eq. (5) to solve for initial velocity
xðtÞ ¼ tan h cos2 hov2
o
g
or
vo ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
xðtÞg
tan h cos2 ho
s
ð12Þ
and finally substitute Eq. (11) into Eq. (2) where y(t) = 0 to solve
for height
yo ¼  tan hvo cos ho
g

 tan hvo cos ho
2
þ voy


ð13Þ
From Eqs (12) and (13), the initial droplet velocity (vo) and
z-coordinate (y) can be derived from the droplet launch angle (ho),
horizontal distance (x), and impact angle (h). The launch angle is
currently not attainable from spatter pattern measurements, present-
ing a significant limitation to utilizing this approach in casework.
For the purposes of analysis, however, the known horizontal launch
angle of 0 was used. Figures 9 and 10 show these results for pre-
dicting the z-coordinate and initial velocity, respectively.
On average, projectile motion calculations result in a z-coordi-
nate underestimation of )24 mm (28% error) with a range between
)11 and )35 mm. The initial velocity values derived from projec-
tile motion equations do not differ statistically from the velocity
values measured from the high-speed photographs of droplet disin-
tegration. This underestimation could result from assuming a 0
launch angle. From the high-speed photographs, it is clear that
blood droplets are projected over a variety of angles. Also, the
exclusion of drag forces could be a factor. However, if this were
the case, a similar underestimation of velocity would have been
expected.
Drag is proportional to the square of droplet velocity and inver-
sely proportional to a droplets diameter. Consequently, small fast
droplets are more susceptible to these effects. To study the conse-
quence of ignoring drag, blood droplet deceleration was modeled
using Eq. (9) for droplet diameters and velocities observed in this
experiment. These calculations are shown in Fig. 11. These error
calculations demonstrate that drag forces must be taken into account
for all droplets with initial velocities >3 m⁄sec. Otherwise, for drop-
let >1.6 mm diameter and traveling <3 m⁄sec, the effects of drag
can generally be ignored with minimal impact on z-coordinate
-50
0
50
100
20
40
60
80
Pressure (kPa)
Z-coord Offset (mm)
3.2mm dia droplet
2.7mm dia droplet
FIG. 8—The lowest z-coordinate offset over four applied air pressures
and two droplet diameters.
-50
0
50
100
20
40
60
80
Pressure (kPa)
Z-coord Offset (mm)
3.2mm dia droplet
2.7mm dia droplet
FIG. 9—Projectile motion equations were used to predict the z-coordinate
over the four applied air pressures and two droplet diameters tested. Error
bars represent the 95% confidence interval.
0
1
2
3
4
5
20
40
60
80
Pressure (kPa)
Initial Velocity (m/s) 
Expected velocity
Observed velocity
FIG. 10—Projectile motion equations were used to predict the initial
velocity over the four applied air pressures and two droplet diameters
tested. Observed initial velocity was derived from high-speed photographs
of droplet disintegration. Error bars represent the 95% confidence interval.
-50
0
50
100
20
40
60
80
Pressure (kPa)
Z-coord Offset (mm)
3.2mm dia droplet
2.7mm dia droplet
FIG. 7—The average z-coordinate offset over four applied air pressures
and two droplet diameters. Error bars represent the 95% confidence
interval.
1140
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 6 ---

calculations. In this experiment, the stain selection criteria favored
larger stains. With this in mind, the larger droplets within the high-
speed images were found to be >0.8 mm diameter and traveling
<3 m⁄sec. Therefore, ignoring drag is expected to introduce no
more than 30% error in predicting the z-coordinate in this experi-
ment. This is quite substantial and highlights that any attempt to
incorporate projectile motion into AO modeling must take drag into
account.
AO error associated with size and xy-coordinate was calculated
using the stain triangulation lines at the point with which they
crossed the known x-axis, which runs perpendicular to the spatter
flight direction. For each spatter pattern, the xy-coordinate was
measured as the average offset between each triangulation line and
the known xy-coordinate, while AO size was measured as the 95%
confidence interval of this average. These calculations are presented
in Fig. 12.
No statistically significant correlations were found between the
observed errors, and blood volumes and velocities tested. XY-coor-
dinates were found to be quite accurate, with the least accurate
spatter pattern deviating from the known xy-coordinate by only
4 mm. On the other hand, the AO size was found to be larger than
expected. The known blood droplet diameters tested were 2.7 and
3.2 mm, while the calculated sizes ranged between 7.8 and
14.3 mm, representing a two- to fivefold increase. Further analysis
of these results revealed a number of outliers present within each
trial. This was investigated further.
One of the 24 spatter patterns was selected randomly for addi-
tional analysis. The stain selection criteria were lowered to include
stains that could provide a measure of directionality only. This
resulted in the selection of 54 stains. For the purpose of this analy-
sis, instead of starting at each stain and triangulating ‘‘backward,’’
the known xy-position was used as the starting point and lines were
drawn ‘‘forward’’ out to each stain. Where each line overlapped the
corresponding stain, the rotational offset could then be evaluated.
Of these 54 stains, the rotational offsets of 14 (26%) were signifi-
cant enough that it was reasonable to assume that any individual
tasked with fitting an ellipse to a bloodstain was unlikely to have
arrived at the same triangulation line. Four of these representative
stains are shown in Fig. 13 each with their corresponding triangula-
tion path originating from the known xy-coordinate. This finding
clearly demonstrates that a component of AO error is not related to
analyst measurement but is instead inherent in the process of blood
displacement and disintegration.
Postimpact droplet formation is the most likely mechanism for
this contribution to AO size error. This ‘‘fork in the road’’ effect
occurs when a blood volume structure (sheet, filament, or large
droplet) has traveled a certain distance from the AO and reaches
an instability threshold where it disintegrates into smaller volumes.
Subsequently, trajectory lines for these respective bloodstains will
triangulate back to this fork in the road where secondary disintegra-
tion occurred, instead of back to the true AO. Given that this
experiment was designed to reduce the complexity of droplet disin-
tegration, it is likely that this will be more predominant under
bloodshed conditions more typically associated with crime scenes.
Conclusion
Small volumes of blood were disintegrated through the applica-
tion of pressurized air. The resulting spatter patterns were used to
evaluate BPA AO error and investigate the underlying mechanisms.
Under these experimental conditions, z-coordinate predictions were
consistently overestimated by an average of 50%, while using the
lowest z-coordinate within a spatter pattern reduced this error to
8%. However, if this value is to be reported, it should be presented
as an estimate and not as a maximum height calculation. Incorpora-
tion of projectile motion into z-coordinate calculations was found
to underestimate by an average of 28%, while velocity predictions
were found to be quite accurate when compared with the high-
speed photographs. However, the application of projectile motion is
limited at this time as an assumption related to launch angle was
required,
and
the
impact
of
drag
could
not
be
ignored.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
velocity (m/sec)
error (%)
D = 0.2mm
D = 0.4mm
D = 0.6mm D = 0.8mm
D = 1.0mm
D = 1.2mm
D = 1.4mm
D = 1.6mm
FIG. 11—Effect of drag forces on blood droplets between 0.2 and 1.6 mm
in diameter, traveling up to 10 m ⁄ sec. Drag coefficient was set to 1.
-12.0
-6.0
0.0
6.0
12.0
20
40
60
80
Pressure (kPa)
X-coord Offset (mm)
3.2mm dia droplet
2.7mm dia droplet
FIG. 12—XY-coordinate offset was calculated for each of four air
pressures and two droplet diameters tested. Offset was calculated for each
triangulation line at the point which it crossed the known x-axis (y-coordi-
nate = 0). Error bars represent the 95% confidence interval and were used
to assess the area of origin size.
FIG. 13—Four bloodstains from one spatter pattern are shown. Lines rep-
resent the triangulation lines starting from the known xy-position.
BEHROOZ ET AL.
• UNDERLYING MECHANISMS OF BPA ERROR
1141
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 7 ---

XY-coordinate predictions were found to be accurate, with the
greatest offset being only 4 mm. However, AO size estimates were
found to be two- to fivefold greater than the true AO size. Addi-
tional investigation revealed that 26% of the stains within a ran-
domly selected spatter pattern exhibited rotational offset that could
not be accounted for by measurement error. A ‘‘fork in the road’’
mechanism was proposed to explain this offset, whereby unstable
blood volume structures undergo secondary disintegration after first
traveling some distance from the AO.
References
1. Balthazard V, Piedelievre R, Desoille H, Derobert L. Study of projected
droplets
of
blood.
Ann
Med
Leg
Criminol
Police
Sci
Toxicol
1939;19(4):265–323.
2. Carter AL, Podworny EJ. Bloodstain pattern analysis with a scientific
calculator. Can Soc Forensic Sci J 1991;24(1):37–42.
3. James SH, Eckert WG. Interpretation of bloodstain evidence at crime
scenes, 2nd edn. New York, NY: CRC Press, 1999.
4. Raymond MA, Liesegang J, Smith ER. High speed cinematography of
blood droplet deformation in flight—implications for crime scene recon-
struction. In: Jacob B, Bonte W, editors. Advances in forensic sci-
ences—Proceedings of the 13th Meeting of the International Association
of Forensic Sciences; 1993 Aug 22–28; Dsseldorf, Germany. Berlin,
Germany: Verlag Dr. Kçster, 1995;200–7.
5. Carter AL. Directional analysis of bloodstain patterns theory and direc-
tional analysis. J Forensic Identification 2006;56(2):242–56.
6. Karger B, Nusse R, Bajanowski T. Backspatter on the firearm and hand
in experimental close-range gunshots to the head. Am J Forensic Med
Path 2002;23(3):211–3.
7. Randall B. Blood and tissue spatter associated with a chainsaw dismem-
berment. J Forensic Sci 2009;54(6):1310–4.
8. Sweet MJ. Velocity measurements of projected bloodstains from a med-
ium velocity impact source. Can Soc Forensic Sci J 1993;26(3):103–10.
9. Pizzola PA, Roth S, De Forest PR. Blood droplet dynamics—I. J Foren-
sic Sci 1986;31(1):36–49.
10. Hulse-Smith L, Mehdizadeh NZ, Chandra S. Deducing drop size and
impact velocity from circular bloodstains. J Forensic Sci 2005;50(1):54–
63.
11. Knock C, Davison M. Predicting the position of the source of blood
stains for angled impacts. J Forensic Sci 2007;52(5):1–6.
12. Laber TL, Epstein BP, Taylor MJ. High speed digital video analysis of
bloodstain pattern formation from common bloodletting mechanisms.
IABPA News: June 2008:4–12.
13. Rein M. Phenomena of liquid drop impact on solid and liquid surfaces.
Fluid Dyn Res 1993;12:61–93.
14. Gelfand BM. Droplet breakup phenomena in flows with velocity lag.
Prog Energy Combust Sci 1996;22:201–65.
15. Lin SP. Drop and spray formation from a liquid jet. Annu Rev Fluid
Mech 1998;30:85–105.
16. Wells JK. Investigation of factors affecting the region of origin esti-
mates in bloodstain pattern analysis [Master’s Thesis]. Canterbury (New
Zealand): University of Canterbury, 2006.
Additional information and reprint requests:
Lee Hulse-Smith, M.Sc.
Centre of Forensic Sciences
Biology Section, 4th Floor
25 Grosvenor Street
Toronto, ON M7A 2G8
Canada
E-mail: lee.hulsesmith@ontario.ca
1142
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 15564029, 2011, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01835.x by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
