

--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---

Principles of
Bloodstain
Pattern
Analysis
Theory and Practice


--- PAGE 3 ---

CRC SERIES IN
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF CRIMINAL
AND FORENSIC INVESTIGATIONS
VERNON J. GEBERTH, BBA, MPS, FBINA Series Editor
Practical  Homicide Investigation: Tactics, Procedures, and Forensic Techniques,
Third Edition
Vernon J. Geberth
The Counterterrorism Handbook: Tactics, Procedures, and Techniques, Second
Edition
Frank Bolz, Jr.,  Kenneth J. Dudonis, and David P. Schulz
Forensic Pathology, Second Edition
Dominick J. Di Maio and Vincent J. M. Di Maio
Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, Second Edition
William G. Eckert and Stuart H. James
Tire Imprint Evidence
Peter McDonald
Practical Drug Enforcement, Second Edition
Michael D. Lyman
Practical Aspects of Rape Investigation: A Multidisciplinary Approach, Third
Edition
Robert R. Hazelwood and Ann Wolbert Burgess
The Sexual Exploitation of Children: A Practical Guide to Assessment,
Investigation,
and Intervention, Second Edition
Seth L. Goldstein
Gunshot Wounds: Practical Aspects of Firearms, Ballistics, and Forensic
Techniques,
Second Edition
Vincent J. M. Di Maio
Friction Ridge Skin: Comparison and Identification of Fingerprints
James F. Cowger
Footwear Impression Evidence, Second Edition
William J. Bodziak
Principles of Kinesic Interview and Interrogation, Second Edition
Stan Walters
Practical Fire and Arson Investigation, Second Edition
David R. Redsicker and John J. O’Connor
The Practical Methodology of Forensic Photography, Second Edition
David R. Redsicker
Practical Aspects of Interview and Interrogation, Second Edition
David E. Zulawski and Douglas E. Wicklander
Investigating Computer Crime
Franklin Clark and Ken Diliberto
Practical Homicide Investigation Checklist and Field Guide
Vernon J. Geberth


--- PAGE 4 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruction,
Second Edition
Tom Bevel and Ross M. Gardner
Practical Aspects of Munchausen by Proxy and Munchausen Syndrome Investigation
Kathryn Artingstall
Quantitative-Qualitative Friction Ridge Analysis: An Introduction to Basic and
Advanced Ridgeology
David R. Ashbaugh
Practical Criminal Investigations in Correctional Facilities
William R. Bell
Officer-Involved Shootings and Use of Force: Practical Investigative Techniques
David E. Hatch
Sex-Related Homicide and Death Investigation: Practical and Clinical Perspectives
Vernon J. Geberth
Global Drug Enforcement: Practical Investigative Techniques
Gregory D. Lee
Practical Investigation of Sex Crimes: A Strategic and Operational Approach
Thomas P. Carney
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Stuart James, Paul Kish, and T. Paulette Sutton


--- PAGE 5 ---



--- PAGE 6 ---

Principles of
Bloodstain
Pattern
Analysis
Theory and Practice
Stuart H. James
Paul E. Kish
T. Paulette Sutton
A CRC title, part of the Taylor & Francis imprint, a member of the
Taylor & Francis Group, the academic division of T&F Informa plc.
Boca Raton   London   New York   Singapore


--- PAGE 7 ---

Cover design by Alexei Pace. Drag pattern courtesy of Herbert Leon MacDonell.
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2005 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20140708
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-3946-7 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been 
made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the valid-
ity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright 
holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may 
rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti-
lized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopy-
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For 
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com


--- PAGE 8 ---

vii
Foreword
The discipline of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis has advanced to the level that if “blood
evidence”exists investigators and prosecutors want and should have an interpretation. To
do less would be nothing short of ignoring valuable physical evidence.
The evolution of this evidence has been driven by discovery and fueled by DNA. By
using methodical, scientiﬁc principles, crime scene information can be discovered. This
information will re-create events that support or refute witness statements and will assist
the court in determining intent and help the jury to visualize the ﬁnal moments. The
language of bloodstain pattern analysis will provide information that cannot be gained by
other means. Let the physical evidence speak for itself and tell the stories of self-defense or
intent to commit murder.
As a bloodstain pattern analyst I relish in the opportunity to gain further insight into
this discipline, sometimes as conﬁrmation that a different approach can gain the same
result or that this new approach provides a more in-depth review of my case. In any event
I seek to articulate this evidence so that those concerned will gain the same conﬁdence that
I have.
The logic of bloodstain pattern analysis can sometimes be a trap. Just when you think
that you know how to interpret patterns, they give you a different twist. Given classic
patterns it is not difﬁcult to determine their origin; however, we know that crime scenes are
not predictable. The evidence is more often a combination or a portion of the patterns we
know. This subject requires a complete understanding of all aspects of the case. The ability
to apply training, knowledge, and common sense is key to a successful interpretation of a
bloodletting scene. If you want to fully understand the intricacies of bloodstains you need
only refer to the table of contents in this book. Where, when, and how do we begin? Is blood
a unique substance? How do we recognize one pattern or event from another? Is it possible
to alter a bloodstain pattern? What equipment will we need? How do we get this evidence to
court? What if the bloodstains have been entirely or partially cleaned up? Is there an error
rate, and how do we explain our results to a jury?
I believe that this book will meet your requirements and I would recommend it to
readers at every level. Those who are researching at a college or university level will beneﬁt
as much as those who are working in the ﬁeld of forensic science, or otherwise involved in
the criminal justice system. The completeness of this book is a testament to the authors.
Those involved in the ﬁeld of bloodstain pattern analysis, even to the slightest degree, will
recognize their names.
The authors are forensic scientists who have gained the respect of the bloodstain analysis
community through years of work, not only through painstaking analysis of bloodletting
evidence but also through expert courtroom testimony. As you look at these names you will
also see teachers—people who take the time and care to share their knowledge. Years of


--- PAGE 9 ---

viii
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
expertise have come together to write one of the most comprehensive texts on the subject.
The reader need only turn these pages with a mild interest to become both fascinated and
educated.
Pat Laturnus
Bloodstain Pattern Analyst
Instructor–Ontario Police College
Ontario, Canada
Retired–Royal Canadian Mounted Police


--- PAGE 10 ---

ix
Preface
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice presents an in-depth text of
bloodstain pattern analysis that emphasizes a modern thought process of a taxonomic classi-
ﬁcation of bloodstains based on their physical characteristics of size, shape, and distribution
as well as the speciﬁc mechanisms that produce them. The concept of a multidisciplinary
approach using scene and laboratory examinations in conjunction with forensic pathology,
forensic serology, and chemical enhancement techniques is also presented to the reader.
The technical content and quality of this book is increased dramatically with color images
of bloodletting injuries, bloodstains, and crime scenes. Case studies are presented within
individual chapters, and the book is complimented by two chapters that discuss details of
legal issues as they pertain to bloodstain pattern analysis. The coauthors, Stuart H. James,
Paul Erwin Kish, and T. Paulette Sutton, form a nucleus of bloodstain pattern analysts, each
with many years of experience in casework and teaching of basic and advanced bloodstain
pattern analysis courses. 
The chapters that present the scientiﬁc principles and practical application of bloodstain
pattern analysis represent the combined efforts of the authors. They have invited other
respected and qualiﬁed forensic scientists and attorneys to contribute chapters in their
specialties, which has enhanced the quality and scope of the text. The chapters are arranged
in a logical order with Chapter 1, “Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis,” discussing
the evolution of bloodstain pattern analysis from signiﬁcant historical events to its current
level as a discipline within the forensic sciences. 
Chapter 2, “Medical and Anatomic Aspects of Bloodshed,” contributed by forensic
pathologist Dr. Ronald K. Wright, MD, JD, provides an overview of the circulation of blood
within the body and the rate of bleeding and blood volume loss resulting from medical
conditions and speciﬁc injuries. He has also included an interesting section that describes
postmortem lividity and identiﬁable patterned abrasions and bruises on the skin. The
authors agreed that this chapter was essential to the bloodstain pattern analyst for the
understanding of mechanisms of bleeding within and outside the body of the victim.
Chapter 3, “Biological and Physical Properties of Human Blood,” explains the cellular
components of human blood and their functions within the body supplemented with
excellent color images. The physical properties of blood relative to its behavior as a liquid
outside the body is essential for the bloodstain analyst to appreciate in terms of bloodstain
formation. The principles of physics pertaining to surface tension, adhesion and cohesion,
relative density, viscosity, and the non-Newtonian behavior of blood are deﬁned.
Chapter 4, “Physical Properties of Bloodstain Formation,” applies the physical properties
of blood to the shape of an airborne drop or droplet of blood and the size and shape of
resultant bloodstains on horizontal and nonhorizontal surfaces. This chapter also describes
the taxonomic classiﬁcation of bloodstains that will be the emphasis in subsequent chapters
of bloodstain pattern analysis.


--- PAGE 11 ---

x
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Chapter 5, “Passive Bloodstains,” is a detailed chapter that describes a major category
of bloodstains. This chapter is supplemented with numerous color images that afford the
reader many examples of this important taxonomic classiﬁcation of bloodstains.
Chapter 6, “Formation of Spatter and Spatter Associated with a Secondary Mechanism,”
discusses the physical characteristics of spatter formation relative to stain size, shape,
quantity, location, and distribution relative to its taxonomic classiﬁcation. Emphasis is given
to mechanisms associated with the creation of spatter patterns and the important ability of
the bloodstain analyst to recognize the overlapping of stain sizes created by different
mechanisms and the caution to be exercised in making a determination.
Chapter 7, “Impact Spatter Mechanisms,” describes the production of spatter produced
as the result of beating, stabbing, gunshot, explosion, and power tool events. Factors that
limit the production of impact spatter are emphasized.
Chapter 8, “Spatter Associated with a Projection Mechanism,” presents the characteris-
tics of bloodstains and patterns produced by arterial, expiratory, and cast-off mechanisms.
The uniqueness of the patterns as well as the overlap of stain size within a pattern that can be
confused with impact spatter mechanisms is demonstrated.
Chapter 9, “Altered Bloodstain Patterns,” is a chapter that applies to all categories of
bloodstains because physical or biological alterations such as drying, clotting, dilution,
insect activity, and effects of ﬁre are frequently encountered in casework. Recognition of
these alterations cannot be overemphasized. Void patterns and sequencing of bloodstain
patterns are also included in this chapter.
Chapter 10, “Determination of the Area of Convergence and Area of Origin of Blood-
stain Patterns,” is a chapter devoted to the reconstruction of bloodstain events using the
principles of mathematics, including trigonometry. Various methods of the determination
of areas of convergence and origin are explained.
Chapter 11, “Directional Analysis of Bloodstain Patterns with a Computer,” contributed
by Dr. Alfred L. Carter with case studies provided by Craig C. Moore and Mike Illes,
describes the BackTrack program devised by Dr. Carter for the measurement of bloodstains
and the determination of areas of convergence and origin.
Chapter 12, “Documentation and Examination of Bloodstain Evidence,” details the
methods of preparing sketches, diagrams, photographs, and videos of bloodstain evidence
at the scene as well as at the laboratory, where the examination of bloodstained clothing is
crucial prior to testing for DNA analysis.
Chapter 13, “Examination of Bloodstain Patterns at the Scene,” describes additional
detail for proper processing of crime scenes and sample collection, including vehicles for
bloodstain pattern analysis. An important feature of this chapter is the examination of the
body of the victim for bloodstain patterns. 
Chapter 14, “Presumptive Testing and Species Determination of Blood and Blood-
stains,” contributed by Robert Spalding, describes the various presumptive tests for blood,
including their applications and limitations. Mr. Spalding also explains the conﬁrmatory
tests for blood and determination of species of origin.
Chapter 15, “The Detection of Blood Using Luminol,” contributed by Dale Laux,
explains the luminol reaction, its preparation, its use, and interpretation of patterns
revealed by this chemi-luminescent reagent. The principles of luminol photography with
excellent images are provided as well as the effect of the use of luminol on the subsequent
analysis of bloodstains. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

Preface
xi
Chapter 16, “Chemical Enhancement of Latent Bloodstain Impressions,” contributed by
Martin Eversdijk, is an important addition to this text. Martin methodically describes selected
methods for the chemical dye enhancement of trace impressions of blood augmented with
excellent images of bloody enhanced ﬁngerprints, palm prints, and footwear.
Chapter 17, “Approaching the Bloodstain Pattern Case,” explains the importance of
the examination of all relevant information and the logical sequential approach to case
evaluation for the bloodstain analyst. The chapter emphasizes the utilization information
from all involved forensic disciplines for the proper synthesizing of the available data and
the scientiﬁc formulation and testing of hypotheses.
Chapter 18, “Report Writing,” is an expansion of an excellent chapter by Paul E. Kish
that appeared in the text, Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation.
It is a logical format for the writing of a bloodstain pattern analysis report from introduction
to ﬁnal conclusions. 
Chapter 19, “Legal and Ethical Aspects of Bloodstain Pattern Evidence,” contributed by
Carol Henderson and Brittan Mitchell, is updated from the text, Scientiﬁc and Legal
Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation. This chapter details the issues of the
admissibility, weight of the bloodstain evidence, and the qualiﬁcations of the bloodstain
analyst who is called on to provide expert testimony in court. Methods of direct and cross-
examination are discussed as well as ethical issues of the attorney and the expert.
Chapter 20, “Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Postconviction and Appellate Application,”
contributed by Marie Saccoccio also has been updated from the text, Scientiﬁc and Legal
Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation. She discusses the role of the postconviction
attorney and the appeal process with case examples. 
Finally, the Appendices supplement the text with scientiﬁc data including trigonometric
tables, metric equivalents, and scene and laboratory checklists and biohazard safety pre-
cautions. Additionally, court decisions relating to bloodstain pattern analysis and presump-
tive blood testing are included. Numerous references are provided for bloodstain pattern
analysis and the related topics. 
The goal of the authors and contributors was to provide an up-to-date bloodstain
pattern analysis text for crime scene investigators, forensic laboratory personnel, forensic
pathologists, and prosecutors and defense attorneys within the criminal justice system. As
Professor Andre A. Moenssens stated in an article entitled “Novel Scientiﬁc Evidence in
Criminal Cases,” published in the Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology in 1993: 
Attorneys have the responsibility to learn about the scientiﬁc evidence that they
wish to admit. If the attorneys who are questioning and cross-examining the
expert witnesses have a working knowledge of bloodstain pattern analysis, they
will be better equipped to distinguish between those experts with sufﬁcient
qualiﬁcations and those without them. Also, attorneys will be able to more
capably critique an expert’s testimony and limit or eliminate conclusions that are
speculative or over-stated. Unless attorneys know what questions to ask during
cross-examination, much of what the witness testiﬁes to will go unchallenged.
Stuart H. James
Paul E. Kish
T. Paulette Sutton


--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---

xiii
The Authors
Stuart H. James of James and Associates Forensic Consultants, Inc. is a graduate of Hobart
College where he received a BA degree in biology and chemistry in 1962. He received his
MT(ASCP) in medical technology from St. Mary’s Hospital in Tucson, Arizona in 1963.
Graduate courses completed at Elmira College included homicide investigation, bloodstain
pattern analysis, and forensic microscopy. He has completed more than 300 hours of
continuing education and training in death investigation and bloodstain pattern analysis.
A former crime laboratory supervisor in Binghamton, New York, he has been a private
consultant since 1981.
Mr. James has instructed in Forensic Science at the State University of New York and
Broome Community College in Binghamton, New York. Additionally, he has lectured on
the subjects of bloodstain pattern analysis and forensic science throughout the United
States and abroad. He has instructed basic and advanced bloodstain pattern analysis
courses with Paul E. Kish in Pontiac, Michigan, Appleton Wisconsin, Suffolk University in
Boston, Massachusetts, the Henry C. Lee Institute at the University of New Haven in West
Haven, Connecticut, the Centre of Forensic Sciences in Toronto, Canada, the Politie LSOP
Institute for Criminal Investigation and Crime Science in Zutphen, The Netherlands and
the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in the United Kingdom.
He has been consulted on homicide cases in 46 States and the District of Columbia as
well as in Australia, Canada, Germany, South Korea, and the US Virgin Islands and has
provided expert testimony in many of these jurisdictions in state, federal, and military courts.
Mr. James was a co-author of the text entitled, Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at
Crime Scenes. He was also the Editor of Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation both of which were published in 1998. He is a co-editor with Jon J. Nordby of
the text entitled Forensic Science: An Introduction to Scientiﬁc and Investigative Techniques
published in 2003. Mr. James is a fellow in the American Academy of Forensic Sciences and
a distinguished member of the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
(IABPA) as well as the current editor of the quarterly IABPA News. He is also a member of
the Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN).
Paul Erwin Kish is a consulting bloodstain pattern analyst in Corning, New York, as well
as, an adjunct Instructor in the Criminal Justice Program at Elmira College. He holds a
B.S. degree in Criminal Justice and an M.S. degree in Education from Elmira College. He
has been consulted on homicide cases in 30 states within the United States and 7 countries
while presenting expert testimony in 16 states, the District of Columbia, and Canada.
Mr. Kish is an internationally known lecturer on the subject of bloodstain pattern
analysis. He has taught Basic Bloodstain Pattern Analysis courses throughout the United
States, as well as, in Canada, The Netherlands, United Kingdom, and Sweden. He has educated
over 850 students from 17 countries during these weeklong basic bloodstain pattern analysis
courses. He has taught Advanced Bloodstain Pattern Analysis courses in the United States, The


--- PAGE 15 ---

xiv
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Netherlands, and United Kingdom. He has lectured extensively throughout the United States
at forensic and law related conferences and seminars.
He has authored various articles on the topic of bloodstain pattern analysis including
contributions to the texts Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation
(CRC Press, 1998); Forensic Science: An Introduction to Scientiﬁc and Investigative Techniques
(CRC Press, 2003). Mr. Kish is an associate editor of the International Association of
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts News having served as Editor for two years. He is a fellow in the
American Academy of Forensic Sciences, a member of the Scientiﬁc Working Group for
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN), the International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts, Canadian Society of Forensic Science, and International Association for
Identiﬁcation.
T. Paulette Sutton is an Associate Professor of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Assistant
Director of Forensic Services at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center in
Memphis. She holds a B.S. in Medical Technology from the University of Tennessee and a
M.S. in Operations Management Engineering from the University of Arkansas. She has
practiced as a forensic serologist and bloodstain pattern analyst at the University of
Tennessee, Memphis for the past 28 years and is also a member of the crime scene team for
the Shelby County Medical Examiner’s Ofﬁce (Memphis). Sutton has been consulted on
cases in many states and federal jurisdictions and has given expert testimony in criminal,
as well as civil cases, in for both prosecution and defense. She has taught basic and
advanced Bloodstain Analysis courses, as well as developing and teaching a course devoted
entirely to the documentation of bloodstain pattern evidence. Ms. Sutton has lectured
extensively on bloodstain pattern analysis and has received the Lecturer of Merit and the
Distinguished Faculty awards from the National College of District Attorneys.
Ms. Sutton has contributed to the texts Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime
Scenes, 2nd edition (CRC Press, 1998); Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation (CRC Press, 1998); Forensic Science: An Introduction to Scientiﬁc and
Investigative Techniques (CRC Press, 2003) and authored didactic and laboratory exercise
manuals Bloodstain Pattern Analysis in Violent Crimes. She has authored numerous articles
on forensic serology and on bloodstain pattern analysis and serves as an associate editor of
the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts News. Sutton is a member of the
International Association for Identiﬁcation, the International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts and the Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
(SWGSTAIN).


--- PAGE 16 ---

xv
Contributors
Alfred L. Carter is a retired Professor of Physics at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada.
He has done extensive work in the computer analysis of bloodstains and developed software
for this application. He is a member of the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts. He has consulted with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in Ottawa, Canada
and has taught computer analysis of bloodstains in both Canada and the United States.
Martin Eversdijk began his career with the Dutch Police in 1986 and joined the Forensic
Scene of Crime Department in the city of Amstelveen in 1993. He became a staff
member/trainer at the Institute for Criminal Investigation and Crime Science, a national
training center for forensic scene of crime ofﬁcers in the Netherlands. He conducts research
and teaches in the areas of bloodstain pattern analysis, blood searching techniques and
blood enhancement techniques. Mr. Eversdijk is a member of the International Association
of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts and the FBI Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis (SWGSTAIN).
Carol Henderson is Director of the National Clearing House for Science, Technology and
the Law and a Visiting Professor of Law at Stetson University College of Law in Gulfport,
Florida. She is Vice President of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences and has served
on the Board of Directors and as Chairman of the Jurisprudence Section. She is co-editor of
the Encyclopedia of Forensic and Legal Medicine published by Elsevier and a co-author of the
4th Edition of Scientiﬁc Evidence in Civil and Criminal Cases with Moenssens, Starrs and
Inbau published by The Foundation Press in 1995. She is the author of more than 40 articles
on scientiﬁc evidence and ethics.
Mike Illes has been a member of the Ontario Provincial Police for the past 18 years. He has
been involved in the ﬁeld of forensics for 14 years and is the Unit Commander of the
Central Region Forensic Identiﬁcation Unit located in Peterborough, Ontario. In 1994
Sergeant Illes received training in Basic Bloodstain Pattern Recognition in the United States.
He completed the RCMP Forensic Bloodstain Pattern Analyst program and RCMP Math
and Physics Course in 1995. Sergeant Illes is internationally known for his work in
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis. He has done bloodstain crime scene work in Canada (Ontario
and Newfoundland), the United States and Holland. He has given expert opinion evidence
in the Canadian and Netherlands Court systems. Sergeant Illes has conducted forensic
lectures and training courses in Canada, the United States and the Netherlands. Sergeant
Illes sits on the Trent University/Sir Sandford Fleming College Forensic Degree Program
Advisory Committee and is an instructor for that program. He is also a member of the FBI
Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN). 


--- PAGE 17 ---

xvi
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Dale Laux began his forensic career in 1980 after graduating from The Ohio State
University with a Masters of Science degree in developmental biology. He studied limb
regeneration in salamanders and owes his scientiﬁc reasoning to his advisor, Dr. Roy
Tassava, who taught him how to think and rationalize. Dale has spent his entire career with
the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identiﬁcation and Investigation (BCI), a division of the
Attorney General’s Ofﬁce. He has witnessed and been a part of the evolution of forensic
biology from ABO and genetic markers to DNA. He has authored or co-authored 12 papers,
presented 20 papers, has given numerous workshops on the use of luminol, and has lectured
on a wide variety of forensic topics. He is a member and past president of the Midwestern
Association of Forensic Scientists (MAFS) and a Fellow of the American Academy of Forensic
Sciences. He was named Ohio Peace Ofﬁcer of the Year in 1988, received the Superintendent’s
Award from BCI in 2004, and was recently given the Distinguished Service Award from
MAFS, their highest honor. He dedicates his chapter on luminol to his wife Denise, for her
encouragement and support, and to their sons, David and Kevin, for their assistance in his
experiments.
Britton L. Mitchell is a Law and Science Fellow for the National Clearing House for Science,
Technology and the Law. She graduated magna cum laude from Stetson College of Law and
is an active member of the Florida Bar. She also received a B.S. degree in Accounting from
Florida State University and a B.S. in Economics from Brigham Young University.
Marie Elena Saccoccio is an alumna of New England School of Law and Yale Law School
and is a practicing attorney in Cambridge, Massachusetts concentrating on appellate/post-
conviction matters. She is admitted to the bars of Colorado, Florida and Massachusetts
where she works as a sole practitioner. She is the former judicial law clerk to the Honorable
Wade Brorby of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.
Robert P. Spalding served in the FBI for 28 years as an investigative Special Agent in
Cleveland and at the Forensic Science Research and Training Center (FSRTC) in Washington,
DC and the FBI Academy. In 1993 he was assigned to the newly formed Evidence Response
Team (ERT) Unit where he taught crime scene investigation to FBI ﬁeld ofﬁce personnel. In
this assignment, he also taught bloodstain pattern analysis to ﬁeld FBI Evidence Response
Team Personnel at the FBI Academy. Spaulding received his B.S. and M.S. degrees from the
University of Maine in 1965 and 1968 respectively. He is currently a member of several
professional organizations and is the owner of Spalding Forensics, LLC, a consulting and
training ﬁrm in Centreville, Virginia, specializing in casework involving bloodstain patterns
and crime scene reconstruction. 
Ronald K. Wright is a forensic pathologist in private practice. He has a B.S. in Biology and
Chemistry from Southwest Missouri University, an M.D. from St. Louis University School
of Medicine and a J.D. from the University of Miami School of Law. He has practiced as a
forensic pathologist and toxicologist for more than 30 years, holding positions of Deputy
Chief Medical Examiner of the State of Vermont and Miami-Dade County Florida and
Chief Medical Examiner of Broward County, Florida.


--- PAGE 18 ---

xvii
Acknowledgments
The authors express their thanks and appreciation to the contributing authors, Dr. Ronald
Wright, Dr. Al Carter, Dale Laux, Martin Eversdijk, Carol Henderson, Mike Illes, and
Marie Saccoccio for their excellent chapters. We also appreciate the efforts of Alexei Pace
for providing excellent diagrams that supplement the text as well as the design of the cover,
Lisa DiMeo of Arcana Forensics in San Diego, California for her review of some technical
aspects of the book and for providing photographs, and Lisa Elrod of Memphis Tennessee
for her invaluable consultation with regard to many of the photographic images. 
The staff at CRC Press in Boca Raton, Florida including Life Sciences Publisher, Barbara
Norwitz, Senior Acquisitions Editor Becky McEldowney, Editorial Project Development
Manager, Helena Redshaw, Project Editor Suzanne Lassandro, and Editorial Assistant Susan
Longo deserve special recognition for their guidance and assistance throughout the develop-
ment of this book.
The authors also thank the following individuals and organizations for their support
and providing photographs that have enhanced the quality of this book.
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois
Larry Barksdale, Lincoln Police Department, Lincoln, Nebraska
Joe Cocco, Pennsylvania State Police
Greg Coughlin, New Castle County Police, New Castle, Delaware
Dazor Manufacturing Company, St. Louis, Missouri
Anthony Dinardo, New Castle County Police, New Castle, Delaware
Philippe Esparanca, French Gendarmerie Laboratory, France
Jan Ewanow, Binghamton Police Department, Binghamton, New York
Dr. Jerry Francisco, MD, Retired Medical Examiner, Memphis, Tennessee
Cynthia Gardner, MD, Hamilton County Coroner’s Ofﬁce, Cincinnati, Ohio
Dennis Kunkel Microscopy, Inc., Kailua, Hawaii
Herbert Leon MacDonell, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning, New York
Martin County Sheriffs Ofﬁce, Stuart, Florida
Paul Mergenthaler, New Castle County Police, New Castle, Delaware
Linda Netzel, Kansas City Crime Laboratory, Kansas City, Missouri
Steve Nichols, University of Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee
Pinellas County Sheriffs Ofﬁce, Clearwater, Florida
Rex Sparks, Des Moines Police Department, Des Moines, Iowa
Jeffrey A. Strobach, Wausau Police Department, Wausau, Wisconsin
Steven Symes, Mercyhurst College, Erie, Pennsylvania
Todd Thorne, Kenosha Police Department, Kenosha, Wisconsin
David Williams, Rochester Police Department, Rochester, New York


--- PAGE 19 ---

xviii
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Jim Wallace, University of Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee
United States Attorneys Ofﬁce, Washington, DC
Additionally, the continuing patience, support and understanding of Victoria Wendy
Hilt of Fort Lauderdale, Florida and Pam Kish of Corning, New York are truly appreciated.
Stuart H. James
Paul E. Kish
T. Paulette Sutton


--- PAGE 20 ---

xix
Contents
Foreword
vii
Preface 
ix
The Authors 
xiii
Contributors 
xv
Acknowledgments 
xvii
1
Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
1
Introduction 
1
Objectives of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
1
Scientiﬁc Approach to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
2
Historical Development 
3
International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts 
7
Classiﬁcation of Bloodstains 
7
Low-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter 
7
Medium-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter 
7
High-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter 
7
Acceptance within the Scientiﬁc Community 
8
Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
8
Education and Training in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
9
Conclusion 
10
2
Medical and Anatomical Aspects of Bloodshed
11
Introduction 
11
The Circulation of Blood 
11
Rate of Bleeding 
13
Blood Volume 
13
Causes of Blood Volume Loss 
15
Blood Loss Resulting from Medical Conditions 
15
Bleeding from the Skin 
15
Bleeding from the Mouth and Nose 
16
Bleeding from the Respiratory System 
20
Bleeding from the Gastrointestinal Tract 
20
Blood Loss Resulting from Injuries 
21
Abrasions 
21
Lacerations 
21
Incised Wounds 
24


--- PAGE 21 ---

xx
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Stab Wounds 
26
Gunshot Wounds 
27
Contact Wounds 
29
Intermediate-Range Gunshot Wounds 
30
Distant or Long-Range Gunshot Wounds 
31
Gunshot Exit Wounds 
31
Postmortem Aspects of Blood in the Body 
32
Bloodstain Patterns within the Body 
34
Patterns Associated with Postmortem Lividity 
34
Patterns Associated with Postmortem Marbling of the Skin 
35
Petechial Hemorrhaging (Tardieu Spots) 
35
Patterns Associated with Bruises 
36
Patterns Associated with Abrasions 
37
Conclusion 
39
3
Biological and Physical Properties
of Human Blood
41
Biological Functions of Human Blood 
41
Composition of Blood 
42
Volume and pH 
42
Plasma 
42
White Blood Cells (Leucocytes) 
44
Red Blood Cells (Erythrocytes) 
45
Hemoglobin 
45
Platelets (Thrombocytes) and Clotting Factors 
45
Physical Properties of Blood 
48
Viscosity 
48
Blood — A Non-Newtonian Fluid 
49
Poiseuille’s Equation 
49
Surface Tension 
50
Adhesion, Cohesion, and Capillarity 
53
Relative Density 
53
Effects of Drugs and Alcohol on Bloodstains 
55
Blood Use in Experiments 
56
4
Physical Properties of Bloodstain Formation
59
Drop Formation and Travel 
59
The Shape of a Falling Drop 
61
Volume of a Drop of Blood 
63
Drop Volume as a Function of Source 
63
Distance Fallen 
65
Classiﬁcation of Bloodstain Patterns 
67
Passive 
68
Spatter 
68
Altered 
69


--- PAGE 22 ---

Contents
xxi
5
Passive Bloodstains
71
Introduction 
71
Free-Falling Drops on Horizontal Surfaces 
71
Free-Falling Drops on Angular Surfaces 
73
Drip Patterns 
76
Drip Trails 
79
Splashed Bloodstain Patterns 
82
Flow Patterns 
84
Blood Pools 
87
Saturation 
87
Transfer Bloodstains 
88
Recognizable Blood Transfer Stains 
92
Conclusion 
92
6
Formation of Spatter and Spatter Associated
with a Secondary Mechanism
99
Introduction 
99
Physical Properties of Blood Relative to Spatter Formation 
99
Physical Characteristics of Spatter Patterns 
100
Size Range and Quantity of Spatters 
100
Distribution and Location of Spatter 
102
Shape of Spatters 
103
Effect of Target Surface Texture on Spatter Appearance 
106
Mechanisms Associated with the Creation of Spatter Patterns 
107
Signiﬁcance of Spatter Identiﬁcation 
108
Spatter Associated with a Secondary Mechanism 
108
Satellite Spatters on Horizontal Surfaces 
110
Satellite Spatters on Vertical Surfaces 
112
7
Impact Spatter Mechanisms
119
Introduction 
119
Impact Spatter Associated with Beating and Stabbing Events 
119
Impact Spatter Associated with Gunshot, Explosions,
and Power Tools 
131
Back Spatter 
136
Forward Spatter 
138
Detection of Blood in the Barrels of Firearms 
147
Caveats 
148
8
Spatter Associated with a Projection Mechanism
149
Introduction 
149
Arterial Mechanisms 
149
Bloodstain Patterns Produced by Medical Conditions
of the Venous System 
158


--- PAGE 23 ---

xxii
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Expiratory Mechanisms 
160
Expiratory Bloodstain Experiments 
167
Cast-Off Mechanisms 
169
9
Altered Bloodstain Patterns
179
Introduction 
179
Diffusion and Capillarity of Bloodstains 
179
Aging of Blood 
180
Drying of Blood 
182
Clotting of Blood 
188
Diluted Bloodstains 
194
Removal of Bloodstains 
196
Effects of Fire and Soot on Bloodstains 
200
Fly and Other Insect Activity 
206
Void Patterns 
210
Sequencing of Bloodstains 
212
Conclusion 
216
10
Determination of the Area of Convergence 
and Area of Origin of Bloodstain Patterns
217
Introduction 
217
A Pattern 
217
Area of Convergence
217
Area of Origin 
219
Basic Trigonometry of a Right Triangle 
220
Angle of Impact 
221
Measuring Bloodstains 
223
Selection of Stains 
224
Methods of Area of Origin Determination 
225
Documentation 
226
Alternative Methods 
233
Trigonometric Method 
233
Graphic Method 
234
“Using” Surfaces 
234
11
Directional Analysis of Bloodstain Patterns 
with a Computer
241
Introduction 
241
Some Basic Theory 
241
Locating the Blood Sources 
242
An Example of Virtual Paths Compared to Actual Flight Paths 
243
The Two Impact Angles (α and γ) Depend on the Shape
of the Bloodstain 
244
Using Ellipses to Analyze Bloodstains 
246


--- PAGE 24 ---

Contents
xxiii
More about Ellipses 
248
Laboratory Study of a Double Blow with the BackTrack Software 
249
Summary 
253
A Case Study by Detective Craig C. Moore of the Niagara Regional 
Police Service, Ontario, Canada 
254
Two Case Studies by Sgt. Mike Illes of the Ontario Provincial Police, 
Peterborough Detachment 
257
Case #1 Multiple impacts in a limited space 
257
Case #2 Expirated bloodstaining 
259
Credits 
261
12
Documentation and Examination 
of Bloodstain Evidence
263
Introduction 
263
Methods of Documenting Bloodstain Patterns 
264
Notes 
264
Sketches and Diagrams 
265
Photographs 
267
Basic Photographic Equipment List 
274
Video 
274
Documentation of the Crime Scene 
275
Indoor Crime Scenes 
275
Outdoor Crime Scenes 
281
Documentation and Examination of Motor Vehicles 
282
Documentation and Examination of Bloodstains
in the Laboratory 
282
Examination of Bloodstained Clothing 
283
Collection and Preservation of Bloodstain Evidence 
294
13
Evaluation of Bloodstain Patterns at the Scene
297
Introduction 
297
Processing Scenes 
297
General Processing for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
300
Processing for Data 
304
Doors and Locks 
305
Refrigerator 
306
Knife Blocks 
307
Medicines/Medicine Cabinets 
309
Sinks and Faucets 
310
Trash Cans 
311
Temperature 
314
Lighting 
315
Transient Evidence 
316
Sequencing 
316


--- PAGE 25 ---

xxiv
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Vehicles as Crime Scenes 
319
Negative Checklist for Vehicles 
323
Collisions 
323
Seatbelts 
323
Airbags 
323
Effects of Motion and Impact 
327
Processing the Body for Bloodstain Patterns 
329
Documentation of Bodies at the Scene 
329
Use of Scales 
330
Body Removal 
330
Alterations in Transport 
333
Mouth and Nose of the Decedent 
334
Feet or Shoes of the Decedent 
334
Nonambulatory Movement 
336
Posture at Time of Injury 
336
Claims of Self-Defense 
339
Time Lapse 
339
Sequencing Injuries 
339
Victim Viability 
341
Manner of Death 
342
Sample Collection 
343
Suspect Clothing 
343
Separating Contributors 
344
Linking an Accused 
344
14
Presumptive Testing and Species Determination
of Blood and Bloodstains
349
Introduction 
349
The Analysis of Blood in Forensic Serology 
350
Presumptive Tests for Blood 
351
Catalytic Color Tests 
351
Benzidine (Adler Test) 
352
Phenolphthalein (Kastle-Meyer Test) 
353
o-Tolidine 
353
Leucomalachite Green 
354
Tetramethylbenzidine 
355
Comparing the Tests 
356
Tests Using Chemiluminescence and Fluorescence 
357
Luminol 
358
Fluorescein 
360
Other Methods 
361
Conﬁrmatory Tests for Blood 
361
Teichmann Test 
362
Takayama Test 
363
Species Origin Determination for Blood 
364
Serum Protein Analysis 
364
General Methods 
364


--- PAGE 26 ---

Contents
xxv
Ring Precipitin Test 
365
Ouchterlony Double Diffusion Test 
365
Crossed-Over Electrophoresis 
366
Nonserum Protein Analysis 
367
Antihuman Hemoglobin 
367
Other Techniques 
368
15
The Detection of Blood Using Luminol
369
Introduction 
369
Discovery 
369
The Luminol Reaction 
371
Preparation of Luminol 
374
Interpretation of Luminescence 
376
Use of Additional Presumptive Tests 
377
Interpretation of Patterns 
377
Effect of Substrates 
378
Collection of Samples 
378
Effects of Luminol on the Subsequent Analysis of Bloodstains 
379
Luminol Photography 
380
Report Writing 
383
Testimony 
384
Case Studies 
384
Case 1 
384
Case 2 
386
Case 3 
387
16
Chemical Enhancement of Latent Bloodstain 
Impressions
391
Introduction 
391
Preliminary Procedures 
392
Fixing Blood Impressions 
392
Fixative with 2% Aqueous Solution of 5-Sulphosalicylic Acid 
393
Preparation of the Fixing Solution 2% Aqueous
5-Sulphosalicylic Acid 
393
Fixing Impressions with Methanol 
394
General Methods for Application of the Fixing Solutions 
394
Method 1 
394
Method 2 
394
Method 3 
395
General Methods for the Application of the Chemical Dye Reagents 
395
Method 1 
395
Method 2 
395
Method 3 
395
Rinsing Procedure 
395
Preparation of the Rinse Solution for Water-Based Chemical Dyes 
395
Application of the Rinse Solution for Methanol-Based Chemical Dyes 
396


--- PAGE 27 ---

xxvi
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Preparation of the First and Second Rinse Solutions
for Methanol-Based Chemical Dyes 
396
Rinse Solution 1 
396
Rinse Solution 2 
396
General Methods for the Application of the Rinse Solutions 
396
Method 1 
396
Method 2 
397
Method 3 
397
Caveats 
397
Amido Black Water-Based 
398
Advantages 
398
Disadvantages 
398
Preparation of Amido Black Water-Based Without Fixative 
400
Preparation of Amido Black Water-Based with Fixative 
400
Method of Use 
401
Caveats 
402
Amido Black Methanol-Based 
402
Advantages 
402
Disadvantages 
402
Preparation of Methanol-Based Amido Black 
403
Method of Use 
403
Amido Black Water-Ethanol Based 
403
Preparation of Amido Black Water-Ethanol Based 
403
Preparation of the Rinse Solution for Amido Black Water-Ethanol Based 404
Method of Use 
404
Caveats 
404
Hungarian Red Water-Based 
405
Advantages 
406
Disadvantages 
406
Method of Use 
406
Caveats 
406
Aqueous Leucocrystal Violet 
408
Advantages 
408
Disadvantages 
409
Preparation of ALCV 
409
Method of Use 
409
Caveats 
409
Coomassie Brilliant Blue 
412
Advantages 
412
Disadvantages 
412
Preparation of Coomassie Brilliant Blue Methanol Based 
412
Coomassie Brilliant Blue Water-Methanol Based 
413
Preparation of Coomassie Brilliant Blue Water-Methanol Based 
413
Preparation of the Rinse Solution for Water-Methanol Based
Coomassie Brilliant Blue 
414
Method of Use 
414
Caveats 
414


--- PAGE 28 ---

Contents
xxvii
Crowle’s Double Stain 
414
Advantages 
415
Disadvantage 
415
Preparation of Crowle’s Double Stain 
415
Method of Use 
415
Caveats 
416
Titanium Dioxide Suspension 
416
Advantages 
417
Disadvantages 
417
Preparation of Titanium Dioxide Suspension 
417
Method of Use 
417
Caveats 
419
General Notes of Precaution 
419
17
Approaching the Bloodstain Pattern Case
421
Introduction 
421
Sequence for Approaching Bloodstain Cases 
422
Obtain a Brief Background of the Case 
422
Examination of the Crime Scene 
423
Initial Review of Crime Scene and Evidence Photographs 
424
Examination of Autopsy or Hospital Photographs 
424
Examination of Autopsy Protocol or Hospital Records 
425
Examination of Crime Scene Sketches/Diagram(s) 
425
Examination of Crime Scene and Evidence Photographs 
426
Examination of Physical Evidence 
427
Sequencing Evidence Examinations 
428
Serology Reports 
429
Crime Scene Investigator’s Notes and Reports 
429
Responding Ofﬁcer’s Notes 
430
Emergency Medical Technicians’ Notes or Depositions 
430
Additional Forensic Reports 
430
Synthesizing the Data 
431
Data Synthesis for Bloodstain Pattern (A)
431
Formulation and Testing of Hypotheses 
431
Data Synthesis for Bloodstain Pattern (A)
431
Hypothesis for Bloodstain Pattern (A) 
431
Testing of Hypothesis of Bloodstain Pattern (A) 
431
Formulation of a Scenario 
432
Factors to Consider When Analyzing a Bloodstain Pattern Case 
432
18
Report Writing
433
Introduction 
433
Scene-Speciﬁc Reports
434
Evidence-Speciﬁc Laboratory Reports 
434
Final Report 
434


--- PAGE 29 ---

xxviii
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Report Content 
434
Report Phrases 
435
Introduction of the Report 
436
Sample Introduction 
436
Body of the Report 
437
Crime Scene 
438
Physical Evidence 
438
Special Issues 
438
Conclusion(s) of the Report 
440
The Finished Report 
441
19
Legal and Ethical Aspects of Bloodstain 
Pattern Evidence
443
Introduction 
443
Legal Issues 
443
Admissibility 
443
Weight of the Evidence 
449
Qualiﬁcations of Experts 
450
Burden of Proof 
454
Chain of Custody 
454
Discovery 
455
Direct and Cross-Examination of the Expert 
459
Attorney’s Goals and Methods of Direct Examination 
459
Demonstrative Evidence 
460
Attorneys’ Goals and Methods of Cross-Examination 
462
Advice to the Expert — Guidelines for Deposition
and Trial Testimony 
464
Ethical Issues 
466
Expert’s Ethics 
466
Attorneys’ Ethics in Dealing with Experts 
467
Expert Witness Malpractice 
470
Conclusion
478
20
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Postconviction 
and Appellate Application
479
Introduction 
479
A Bit of History 
479
The Postconviction Attorney’s Role—The Daunting Task 
483
The Appeal 
483
Admissibility 
484
Expert Qualiﬁcations 
484
The Collateral Attack 
486
Perjurious Expert Testimony—Newly Discovered Evidence 
487
Prosecutorial Misconduct—Denial of Due Process 
487


--- PAGE 30 ---

Contents
xxix
Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
489
Conclusion 
496
References
497
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
497
Medical and Medical–Legal Aspects of Bloodshed 
499
Presumptive Testing and Species Determination of Blood
and Bloodstains 
499
General References 
499
Speciﬁc References 
500
Luminol 
502
Chemical Enhancement of Latent Blood Impressions 
504
Appendix A: Trigonometric Tables—Sine
and Tangent Functions
505
Appendix B: Metric Measurements 
and Equivalents
507
Appendix C: Scene and Laboratory
Checklists
511
Appendix D: Biohazard Safety Precautions
517
Universal Precautions Policy 
517
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus 
518
Hepatitis 
518
Basic Rules for Biohazard Safety 
519
Minimizing Biohazard Contamination at the Crime Scene 
519
Guidelines for the Selection of the Proper Personal
Protective Equipment 
520
Precautions for Evidence Collection 
520
Disposables 
520
Personal Protective Equipment Removal 
521
Selection of Personal Protective Equipment 
521
References
522
Appendix E: Court Decisions Relating to Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis
523
Appendix F: Court Decisions Relating to Presumptive
Blood Tests
527
Presumptive Testing Cases 
527
Luminol Cases 
527
Benzidine Cases 
528
Orthotolidine/Ortho-Tolidine/o-Tolidine Cases 
529


--- PAGE 31 ---

xxx
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Leucomalachite/Leuco-Malachite Green Cases 
529
Hemastix® Case 
529
Phenolphthalein Cases 
530
Glossary of Terminology
531
Index
533


--- PAGE 32 ---

1
1
Introduction to Bloodstain 
Pattern Analysis
Introduction
Blood is one of the most signiﬁcant and frequently encountered types of physical evidence
associated with the forensic investigation of death and violent crime. The identiﬁcation
and individualization of human bloodstains have progressed over the past 100 years since
the ABO grouping system was discovered by Landsteiner in 1901. The techniques for the
individualization of human blood in forensic science relied on the ABO system for many
years. The development of the characterization of the red cell isoenzymes and serum genetic
markers in the late 1970s dramatically increased the individualization of human blood.
The work of Sir Alec Jeffreys in the development of DNA proﬁling in 1985 was a milestone
in forensic science. Since then the techniques of DNA analysis in forensic cases has rapidly
evolved through PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and STR (short tandem repeat) tech-
niques and afforded the forensic scientist a powerful tool for the individualization of
human blood. Bloodstains collected from a scene of violent death where bloodshed has
occurred and blood samples collected from clothing of the victim and the accused can
now provide a link between an assailant and a victim to a high degree of scientiﬁc certainty. 
The identiﬁcation and individualization of human blood is cojoined with the discipline
of bloodstain pattern analysis (BPA). BPA focuses on the analysis of the size, shape, and
distribution of bloodstains resulting from bloodshed events as a means of determining the
types of activities and mechanisms that produced them. This information coupled with
DNA individualization and wound interpretation from the autopsy examination of the
victim by the forensic pathologist provides a basis for the reconstruction of the bloodshed
events. The scientiﬁc analysis of bloodstain pattern evidence has proved crucial in numer-
ous cases where the manner of death is questioned and the issue of homicide, suicide,
accident, or natural death must be resolved in a criminal or civil litigation or proceeding.
Objectives of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
BPA is a discipline that uses the ﬁelds of biology, physics, and mathematics. BPA may be
accomplished by direct scene evaluation and/or careful study of scene photographs (pref-
erably color photographs with measuring device in view) in conjunction with detailed
examination of clothing, weapons, and other objects regarded as physical evidence. Details


--- PAGE 33 ---

2
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
of hospital records, postmortem examination, and autopsy photographs also provide useful
information and should be included for evaluation and study. In cases where a scene inves-
tigation is not possible and photographs must be relied on, detailed sketches, diagrams,
reports of crime scene investigators, and laboratory reports should be available for review.
Relative to the reconstruction of a crime scene, BPA may provide information to the
investigator in many areas.
• Areas of convergence and origin of the bloodstains
• Type and direction of impact that produced bloodstains or spatter
• Mechanisms by which spatter patterns were produced
• Assistance with the understanding of how bloodstains were deposited onto items
of evidence
• Possible position of victim, assailant, or objects at the scene during bloodshed
• Possible movement and direction of victim, assailant, or objects at the scene after
bloodshed
• Support or contradiction of statements given by accused and/or witnesses
• Additional criteria for estimation of postmortem interval
• Correlation with other laboratory and pathology ﬁndings relevant to the investigation
The goal of the reconstruction of the crime scene using BPA is to assist the overall
forensic investigation with the ultimate questions that must be addressed, which include,
but are not limited to, the following:
• What event(s) occurred?
• Where did the event(s) occur?
• When and in what sequence did they occur?
• Who was there during each event?
• Who was not there during each event?
• What did not occur?
Scientiﬁc Approach to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
The approach to BPA must adhere to the scientiﬁc method and rely on the principles of biology,
physics, and mathematics. Education in these areas is highly recommended. A combination of
training through formal instruction, personal experimentation, and experience with actual
casework is necessary before an individual acquires adequate proﬁciency in the analysis of
bloodstain patterns to answer these types of questions. Contemporaneous experiments to
duplicate speciﬁc patterns should be considered relative to a given case to support an analysis
or conclusion. Some conservative speculation is permissible during the initial investigative
stages of a case. However, ﬁnal opinions, contents of a written report, and ultimate court
testimony must be based on scientiﬁc fact with no speculation. All potential explanations should
be explored thoroughly and recognized and acknowledged by the analyst. Analysis of blood-
stains should be correlated with postmortem and laboratory ﬁndings in an investigation. For
example, when an arterial spurt pattern is observed, the autopsy report should indicate a cut
or breached artery in the victim. In those cases where an assailant as well as the victim produces
bloodshed or where there are multiple victims, the individualization of the bloodstains by the
forensic laboratory is critical. It is important to stay within the realm of that which can be


--- PAGE 34 ---

Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
3
proven scientiﬁcally and not to overinterpret bloodstain evidence. This axiom particularly
applies when the number of bloodstains is limited because a single or few small bloodstains
do not often lend themselves to useful valid analysis. Conclusions based on crime scene pho-
tographs should be conservative when the investigator has not had the opportunity to examine
the crime scene personally and must rely on the photographic documentation of others.
Historical Development
The study of bloodstain patterns and the consideration of the physical processes in which
the distribution of these patterns can reconstruct details of activities at scenes of death and
violent crime have recently emerged as a recognized forensic skill. Historically, bloodstain
analysis has suffered through a long period of neglect, and as a result investigators in death
cases frequently have not appreciated the very obvious information available from this
forensic tool. Signiﬁcant contributions have been made in this discipline as documented
in the following timeline.
1895 Dr. Eduard Piotrowski
The earliest known signiﬁcant study in bloodstain interpre-
tation that has been documented and preserved was done by Dr. Eduard Piotrowski, assistant
at the Institute for Forensic Medicine in Krakow, Poland. His work, entitled Uber Entstehung,
Form, Richtung und Ausbreitung der Blutspuren nach Hiebwunden des Kopfes, was published
in Vienna in 1895 (Figure 1.1). Piotrowski recognized that “It is of the highest importance
to the ﬁeld of forensic medicine to give the fullest attention to bloodstains found at the
Figure 1.1
The 1895 Eduard Piotrowski published study, Concerning Origin, Shape, Direction
and Distribution of the Bloodstains following Head Wounds Caused by Blows.


--- PAGE 35 ---

4
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
scene of a crime because they can throw light on a murder and provide an explanation for
the essential moments of the incident.” Through the efforts of Herbert Leon MacDonell of
Corning, New York, the Historian for the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts, this work has been translated from the German text and reprinted in German and
English as Concerning Origin, Shape, Direction and Distribution of the Bloodstains following
Head Wounds Caused by Blows. This work is completely reproduced with color plates of the
extensive bloodstain experiments performed by Dr. Piotrowski. According to MacDonell,
“No one preceded Piotrowski in designing meaningful scientiﬁc experiments to show blood
dynamics with such imagination, methodology and thoroughness. He had an excellent
knowledge of the scientiﬁc method and a good understanding of its practical application
to bloodstain pattern interpretation.”
1900 Dr. Paul Jeserich 
Subsequent signiﬁcant work involving the study of bloodstain
patterns at a crime scene is documented by Dr. Paul Jeserich, a forensic chemist in Berlin
who examined homicide scenes during the ﬁrst decade of the 20th century.
1939 Dr. Victor Balthazard
The French scientist Dr. Victor Balthazard and his asso-
ciates conducted original research and experimentation with bloodstain trajectories and
patterns and presented a paper at the 22nd Congress of Forensic Medicine entitled Etude
Des Gouttes De Sang Projete. This was translated from French to English as Research on
Blood Spatter.
1955 Dr. Paul Kirk
Dr. Paul Kirk of the University of California at Berkeley prepared an
afﬁdavit regarding his ﬁndings based on bloodstain evidence to the Court of Common Pleas
in the case of the State of Ohio vs. Samuel Sheppard. This was a signiﬁcant milestone in the
recognition of bloodstain evidence by the legal system. Dr. Kirk was able to establish the
relative position of the attacker and victim at the time of the administration of the beating.
1971 Herbert Leon MacDonell
The further growth of interest and use of the signiﬁcance
of bloodstain evidence is a direct result of the scientiﬁc research and practical applications
of bloodstain theory by Herbert Leon MacDonell of Corning, New York (Figure 1.2).
Through the assistance of a Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) grant,
MacDonell conducted research and performed experiments to re-create and duplicate
bloodstain patterns observed at crime scenes. This resulted in his publication of the ﬁrst
modern treatise on bloodstain analysis, entitled Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of
Human Blood (Figure 1.3).
1973 First Formal Bloodstain Training Course Given
MacDonell established a training
program for basic bloodstain pattern interpretation and conducted his ﬁrst Bloodstain
Institute in Jackson, Mississippi in 1973. His second publication, Laboratory Manual on
the Geometric Interpretation of Human Bloodstain Evidence, was used by students. Since
that time he and others have conducted numerous basic and advanced bloodstain analysis
courses throughout the United States and abroad and trained hundreds of police and crime
scene investigators, forensic scientists, and crime laboratory personnel.
I982 Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation Published
MacDonell expanded his original work
in a publication entitled Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation.
1983 Formation of the IABPA
MacDonell conducted the ﬁrst advanced class for BPA,
and the participants organized the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
(Figure 1.4).


--- PAGE 36 ---

Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
5
Figure 1.2
Professor Herbert Leon MacDonell.
Figure 1.3
Copy of Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human Blood, written by
Professor Herbert Leon MacDonell, that was published in 1971.


--- PAGE 37 ---

6
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Experiments and Practical Exercises in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis Published 
Terry L.
Laber and Barton P. Epstein cowrote a laboratory manual entitled Experiments and Practical
Exercises in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis for use in their basic bloodstain analysis courses.
1989 Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes Published
The ﬁrst edition
of the book Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, written by Dr. William
G. Eckert and Stuart H. James, was published. This work included numerous case studies
involving BPA.
1990 Bloodstain Pattern Analysis —Theory and Practice Published
Ross Gardner
and Tom Bevel cowrote a laboratory manual entitled Bloodstain Pattern Analysis —Theory
and Practice.
1993 Bloodstain Pattern Analysis in Violent Crimes Published
T. Paulette Sutton at the
University of Tennessee in Memphis produced a comprehensive manual entitled Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis in Violent Crimes.
1993 Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation Updated to Bloodstain Patterns
MacDonell
updated his original bloodstain pattern manual Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation and
renamed it Bloodstain Patterns.
1997 Bloodstain Pattern Analysis with an Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruction
Published
Tom Bevel and Ross M. Gardner cowrote the text entitled Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis with an Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruction.
1998 Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis Published
Edited by Stuart H. James, Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
was a compilation of chapters concerning bloodstain analysis and legal issues written by
Dr. Alfred Carter, William Fischer, Carol Henderson, Paul Kish, Marie Saccoccio, and
T. Paulette Sutton.
2001 Blood Dynamics Published
Anita Wonder wrote the text entitled Blood Dynamics
in 2001.
Figure 1.4
The International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts logo.


--- PAGE 38 ---

Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
7
2004 Herbert Leon MacDonell Received Honorary Degree
MacDonell received the
honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the University of Rhode Island in recognition
of his contributions to forensic science and BPA. 
As a direct result of MacDonell’s efforts, the evolution of bloodstain analysis in forensic
science increased rapidly and others have made considerable contributions to the ﬁeld in
crime scene reconstruction, teaching, research, and publications. 
Scientiﬁc articles pertaining to aspects of BPA are being seen more frequently in the
scientiﬁc literature in well-known publications including the Journal of Forensic Sciences,
Forensic Science International, the American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, the
Journal of the Canadian Society of Forensic Science, and the Journal of Forensic Identiﬁcation.
International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts 
As of 2004, the IABPA organization consisted of more than 750 members from throughout
the United States and Canada as well as countries throughout the world including Great
Britain, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Australia, Taiwan,
Guam, and Columbia. The association publishes the IABPA News, which is devoted to current
bloodstain topics, providing a schedule of training courses and exploring such issues as the
curriculum for basic instructional courses in bloodstain interpretation, uniformity in blood-
stain terminology, and research in the ﬁeld. The annual IABPA conference agenda includes
numerous case presentations and research topics by members and guest lecturers.
Classiﬁcation of Bloodstains
The conventional method of classifying bloodstains was based on the correlation between
the velocity of the force inﬂuencing the blood source or drop that governed the charac-
teristics and size or diameters of the resulting bloodstains. Three basic categories of stain
groups were used based on the concept that the size of the bloodstain being inversely
proportional to the force applied to the static blood. 
Low-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter
Low-velocity impact spatters (LVIS) are bloodstains created when the source of blood is
subjected to a force with a velocity up to 5 ft/sec. Primary stains measure generally 4 mm
in diameter or greater. 
Medium-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter 
Medium-velocity impact spatters (MVIS) are bloodstains created when the source of blood
is subjected to a force with a velocity in the range of 5 to 25 ft/sec. The diameters of the
resulting stains are in the size range of 1 to 3 mm, although smaller and larger stains may
be present. Stains in this category were usually associated with beatings and stabbings.
High-Velocity Impact Blood Spatter
High-velocity impact spatters (HVIS) are bloodstains created when the source of blood is
subjected to a force with a velocity of greater than 100 ft/sec. The diameters of the spatters


--- PAGE 39 ---

8
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
are predominately less than 1 mm, although smaller and larger stains are often observed
within the pattern. Stains in this category were usually associated with gunshot injuries.
Other mechanisms that produced stains within the size range of the conventional medium-
and high-velocity categories such as satellite spatter and expiratory bloodstains were not
appreciated to the extent that misinterpretations could and did occur.
Many bloodstain analysts have chosen to discontinue this conventional terminology
and classiﬁcation for a more holistic approach to bloodstain classiﬁcation. The issues that
kindled the rethinking of the conventional classiﬁcation of low-medium-high velocity were
the overlapping of stain sizes between the medium- and high-velocity categories and the
realization that mechanisms other than beatings, stabbings, and gunshots frequently pro-
duced stains with size ranges within these categories. The bloodstains and patterns are
classiﬁed based on their physical features of size, shape, location, concentration, and distri-
bution into passive stains, spatter stains, or altered stains. They are further classiﬁed relative
to mechanisms that may produce stains with those characteristics with reference to pertinent
scene, medical and case related facts, and history of the evidence. The analyst may then be
able to establish the speciﬁc mechanism(s) by which the pattern was created.
Acceptance within the Scientiﬁc Community
The reliability of scientiﬁc evidence must be addressed within the forensic science com-
munity including the discipline of BPA. The courts make a preliminary determination of
relevance and admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence as to whether it is relevant, competent,
and properly applied to the facts of the case. So-called “pseudoscience” has no place in the
judicial process. This is referred to as the “gatekeeping” function of the court. Some states
apply the Frye standard, although many apply the Daubert standard. The interpretation
of a Frye inquiry is to determine whether or not the procedure, evidence, or proposed
testimony is relevant and has gained general acceptance within the scientiﬁc community.
Daubert substitutes a reliability test for a relevancy test. Scientiﬁc knowledge must be
derived from the scientiﬁc method supported by validation of expert testimony establishing
a standard of evidentiary reliability. The factors for Daubert are outlined as follows:
• Has the scientiﬁc theory or technique been empirically tested?
• Has the scientiﬁc theory or technique been subjected to peer review and publication?
• What is the known or potential error rate?
• What are the expert’s qualiﬁcations and stature in the scientiﬁc community?
• Can the technique and its results be explained with sufﬁcient clarity and simplicity
so that the court and the jury can understand its plain meaning?
Scientiﬁc Working Group for Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Laboratory has actively organized and funded
Scientiﬁc Working Groups (SWG) to establish professional forums composed of experts
from local, state, federal, and international agencies as well as academic scientists and
private practitioners to address issues within speciﬁc forensic disciplines. The Scientiﬁc
Working Group on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN) was established, and the ﬁrst
meeting was held at the FBI Academy in Quantico, Virginia in March 2002. Recognized


--- PAGE 40 ---

Introduction to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
9
bloodstain pattern analysts and practitioners in related ﬁelds from North America and
Europe convened to discuss and evaluate methods, techniques, protocols, quality assurance,
education, and research relating to BPA. The group meets biannually. Subcommittees were
established in the following areas:
• Education and Training. This subcommittee addresses educational standards for
students and instructors as well as standards for continuing education. 
• Legal. This subcommittee addresses issues of scientiﬁc acceptance, peer review,
publications, error rates, and existence of standards.
• Quality Assurance. This subcommittee addresses issues of report writing, proﬁ-
ciency testing, methodology, and standard operating procedures.
• Research. This subcommittee addresses issues of development of new methodolo-
gies, standards, resources, references, and validation.
• Taxonomy and Terminology. This subcommittee addresses taxonomy, glossary, and
deﬁnitions.
Education and Training in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Bloodstain analysts represent a range of forensic scientists and crime scene investigators with
diverse levels of education. The courts have accepted testimony from individuals with strong
backgrounds in chemistry, biology, and physics. Many of these individuals possess degrees in
science and/or forensic medicine. Many of these individuals are employed in crime laboratories
or medical examiner ofﬁces that have crime scene responsibilities. Crime scene investigators,
evidence technicians, and detectives who do not necessarily possess scientiﬁc backgrounds
have also offered expert testimony. However, college-level courses in geometry, trigonometry,
and basic physics are valuable assets for the understanding of BPA.
It is highly recommended that individuals enroll in a basic 40-hr course in BPA. These
courses are usually taught over a 5-day period and occasionally as a semester course at a
college or university by qualiﬁed instructors at numerous locations in the United States
and abroad. They provide instruction in the theory and practical aspects of BPA, case
presentations, and opportunities to perform laboratory experiments. Participation in lab-
oratory experiments is crucial for understanding the dynamics of bloodstain pattern pro-
duction and the mechanisms involved. Students create stain patterns similar to those
present at crime scenes using various types of apparatuses. Patterns are created on card-
board and other surfaces that may be preserved and retained for future reference.
Advanced courses are also available following the successful completion of a basic
course. The advanced courses are designed to review basic concepts and provide additional
training in areas not explored in the basic courses. For example, an advanced course may
concentrate on computer analysis; digital imaging; examination of bloodstained clothing
and footwear; mock crime scenes; and, in some cases, mock trials. Students are encouraged
to present cases to the group for peer review sessions. Successful completion of basic and
advanced courses in BPA does not imply that an individual is a qualiﬁed bloodstain analyst.
The formal education must be coupled with years of experience with crime scenes and
evidence examinations along with regular attendance at scientiﬁc seminars or conferences.
It is also important to stay abreast of the information in scientiﬁc journals and periodicals.
Membership in professional organizations is encouraged. Students who have success-
fully completed a basic course in BPA are qualiﬁed to apply for membership in the IABPA.


--- PAGE 41 ---

10
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Conclusion
The taxonomic approach to the classiﬁcation of bloodstains and patterns is not entirely
new. It has been discussed among bloodstain pattern analysts for a long time and has been
described to varying extents in several texts published within the past ten years. The
hierarchy of bloodstain categories that are discussed in this text combines the geometric
characterization of the bloodstains with the events that caused the bloodstains (Figure 1.5).
The objective is to strengthen the scientiﬁc process of BPA in actual casework through the
ultimate test in the legal process and the courts. The variable level taxonomic classiﬁcation
is not complex but addresses the issue of the mechanisms that produce overlapping patterns
with respect to the size of the stains. The structure of the categories will permit the analyst
to begin with the primary bloodstain pattern categories — namely, passive, spatter, and
altered — and proceed to speciﬁc subcategories based on case-driven facts.
Figure 1.5
Bloodstain pattern categories.
Bloodstain Pattern Categories
Bloodstains
Passive
Spatter
Altered
Transfer
Flow
Secondary
Mechanism
Diluted
Impact
Mechanism
Clotted
Large
Volume
Drop(s)
Projection
Mechanism
Diffused
Sequenced
Insects
Voids


--- PAGE 42 ---

References
Appendix D: Biohazard Safety Precautions
Figure D.1 Personal protective equipment (PPE) decision
tree.


--- PAGE 43 ---

497
References
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
Balthazard, V., Piedelievre, R., DeSoille, H., and DeRobert, L. Etude des Gouttes de Sang Projecte.
Presented at the 22nd Congress of Forensic Medicine, Paris, France, 1939.
Beneke, M., and Barksdale, L., Distinction of Bloodstain Patterns from Fly Artifacts, Forensic Science
International, 2003.
Betz, P., Peschel, O., Stiefel, D., and Eisenmenger, W., Frequency of Blood Spatters on the Shooting
Hand and of Conjunctival Petechiae Following Suicidal Gunshot Wounds to the Head,
Forensic Science International, 76, 1995, pp. 47–53.
Bevel, T., and Gardner, R.M., Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an Introduction to Crime Scene
Reconstruction, 2nd Edition, CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
Burnett, B.R., Detection of Bone and Bone-Plus-Bullet Particles in Backspatter from Close-Range
Shots to the Head, Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 36, No. 6, November, 1991, pp. 1745–1752.
Byrd, J.H., and Castner, J.L., Forensic Entomology: The Utility of Arthropods in Forensic Investigations,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2001.
DiMaio, V.J.M., Gunshot Wounds: Practical Aspects of Firearms, Ballistics and Forensic Techniques, 2nd
Ed, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1999.
DeForest, P.R., Gaensslen, R.E., and Lee, H.C., Forensic Science: An Introduction to Criminalistics,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, pp. 295–308. 
Evans, G.A., Evans, G.M., Seal, R.M., and Craven, J.L., Spontaneous Fatal Haemorrhage Caused by
Varicose Veins, Lancet, 2:1359–1361, 1973.
Gardner, R.M., Practical Crime Scene Processing and Investigation, CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 2004.
Gray, Henry, Gray’s Anatomy, Crown Publishers, Bounty Brooks, New York, 1977.
Haglund, W.D., and Sorg, M.H., Forensic Taphonomy: The Postmortem Fate of Human Remains,
CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 1997, pp 436–437.
Hueske, E.E., Some Observations Concerning the Deposition of Blood on Handguns as a Result of
Back Spatter from Gunshot Wounds, Southwestern Association of Forensic Science Journal,
19-1, 1997, pp. 19–20.
James, S.H., Ed., Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, CRC Press,
LLC, Boca Raton Florida, 1999.
James, S.H., Eckert, W.G., Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, 2nd Edition, CRC
Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 1999.


--- PAGE 44 ---

498
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
James, S.H., Edel, C.F., Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, Introduction to Forensic Sciences, W.E.
Eckert, Ed., CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 1997.
James, S.H., and Nordby, J.J., Eds., Forensic Science: An Introduction to Scientiﬁc and Investigative
Techniques, CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
Karger, B., Nusse, R., Schroeder, G., Wustenbecker, S., and Brinkmann B., Backspatter from Experi-
mental Close-Range Shots to the Head: I. Microbackspatter, International Journal of Legal
Medicine, 109, 1996, p. 66–74.
Karger, B., Nusse, R., Troger, H.D., and Brinkmann, B., Backspatter from Experimental Close-Range
Shots to the Head: II. Microbackspatter and the Morphology of Bloodstains, International
Journal of Legal Medicine, 110, 1997, pp. 27–30.
Karger, B., Nusse, R., and Banganowski, T. Backspatter on the Firearm and Hand in Experimental
Close-Range Gunshots to the Head, American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology,
23, 2002, pp. 211–213.
Kirk, P.L., Crime Investigation, 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1974, pp. 167–181.
Kish, P.E., and MacDonell, H.L., Absence of Evidence Is not Evidence of Absence, Journal of Forensic
Identiﬁcation, 46, No. 2, March/April, 1996, pp. 160–164.
Laber, T.L., Diameter of a Bloodstain as a Function of Origin, Distance Fallen and Volume of Drop,
IABPA News, Vol. 2, No.1, 1985, pp. 12–16.
Laber, T.L., and Epstein, B.P., Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, Callen Publishing Company, Minneapolis,
1983.
Lee, H.C., Palmbach, T.M., and Miller, M.T., Henry Lee’s Crime Scene Handbook, Academic Press,
San Diego, 2001.
Lehrman, R.L., Physics: The Easy Way, 3rd ed., Barron’s Educational Series, Inc., Hauppaugh, New
York, 1998.
MacDonell, H.L., Interpretation of Bloodstains: Physical Considerations, Legal Medicine Annual,
Wecht, C., Ed., Appleton, Century Crofts, New York, 1971, pp. 91–136.
MacDonell, H.L., and Bialousz, L., Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human Blood, United States
Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, Washington, DC, 1971.
MacDonell, H.L., and Bialousz, L. Laboratory Manual on the Geometric Interpretation of Human
Bloodstain Evidence, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning, New York, 1973.
MacDonell, H.L., and Brooks, B., Detection and Signiﬁcance of Blood in Firearms, Legal Medicine
Annual, Wecht, C., Ed., Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1977, pp. 185–199.
MacDonell, H.L., and Panchou, C., Bloodstain Patterns on Human Skin, Journal of the Canadian
Society of Forensic Science, Vol. 12, No. 3, Sept. 1979, pp. 134–141.
MacDonell, H.L., Criminalistics, Bloodstain Examination, Forensic Sciences, Vol. 3, Wecht, C., Ed.
Matthew Bender, New York, 1981, 37.1–37.26.
MacDonell, H.L., Bloodstain Patterns — Revised, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning, NY, 1997.
MacDonell, H.L., Another Confusing Bloodstain Pattern, IABPA News, Vol. 20, No.3, September
2004, pp. 11–14.
Pex, J.O., and Vaughn, C.H., Observations of High Velocity Blood Spatter on Adjacent Objects,
Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 1987, pp. 1587–1594.
Piotrowski, E., Uber Entstehung, Form, Richtung und Ausbreitung der Blutspuren nach Heibwundendes
Kopfes, K.K. Universitat, Wein, 1895.
Pizzola, P.A., Roth, S., and DeForest, P.R., Blood Droplet Dynamics — I, Journal of Forensic Sciences,
Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 36−49, Jan. 1986.


--- PAGE 45 ---

References
499
Pizzola, P.A., Roth, S., and DeForest, P.R., Blood Droplet Dynamics — II, Journal of Forensic Sciences,
Vol. 31, No. 1, January 1986, pp. 50–64.
Raymond, M.A., Smith, E.R., and Liesegang, J., The Physical Properties of Blood — Forensic Con-
siderations, Science and Justice, Vol. 36, 1996, pp. 153–160.
Reynolds, M., The ABA Card® Hematrace® — A Conﬁrmatory Identiﬁcation of Human Blood
Located at Crime Scenes, IABPA News, Vol. 20, No. 2, June 2004, pp. 4–10.
Rolling and Rolling, Facts and Formulas, McNaughten and Gunn, Nashville, TN, 1973.
Sallah, S., and Bell, A., The Morphology of Human Blood Cells, 6th ed., Abbott Diagnostics, 2003.
Sparks, R. Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency Syndrome, IABPA News, Vol. 20, No. 3, September 2004.
Stephens, B.G., and Allen, T.B., Back Spatter of Blood from Gunshot Wounds — Observations and
Experimental Simulation, Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 28, No. 2, April 1983, pp. 437–439.
Sutton, T.P., Bloodstain Pattern Analysis in Violent Crimes, Division of Forensic Pathology, University
of Tennessee, Memphis, TN, 1993.
White, R.B., Bloodstain Patterns of Fabrics — The Effect of Drop Volume, Dropping Height and
Impact Angle, Journal of the Canadian Society of Forensic Science, Vol. 19, No. 1, 1986, pp. 3–36.
Wonder, A.Y., Blood Dynamics, Academic Press, San Diego, 2001.
Yen, K., Thali, M.J., Kneubuehl, B.P., Peschel, O., Zollinger, U., Dirnhofer, R. Blood Spatter
Patterns — Hands Hold Clues for the Forensic Reconstruction of the Sequence of Events,
American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, Vol. 24, No.2, June 2003, pp. 132–140.
Medical and Medical–Legal Aspects of Bloodshed
DiMaio, V.J., and DiMaio, D., Forensic Pathology, 2nd ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2001.
DiMaio, V.J., Gunshot Wounds: Practical Aspects of Firearms, Ballistics and Forensic Techniques, 2nd ed.,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1999.
Moritz, A.R. The Pathology of Trauma, 2nd ed., Lee and Febiger, Philadelphia, 1954.
Knight, B., Forensic Pathology, 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, New York, 1996.
Spitz, W.U., Ed., Medicolegal Investigation of Death, 3rd ed., Charles C. Thomas, Springﬁeld, IL, 1993.
Presumptive Testing and Species Determination
of Blood and Bloodstains
General References
Deforrest, P., Gaensslen, R.E., and Lee, H.C., Forensic Science: An Introduction to Criminalistics,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, Chapter 9, 1983.
Gaensslen, R.E. Sourcebook in Forensic Serology, Immunology and Biochemistry, U.S. Government
Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, Units 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 1983.
Saferstein, R. Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic Science, 6th ed., Prentice-Hall Inc., Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ, 1997.
Spalding, R.P., FBI Laboratory Serology Unit Protocol Manual, U.S. Department of Justice, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 11, May, 1989.
Sutton, T.P., Presumptive Blood Testing, In James, S. H., Ed., Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of
Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Chapter 4, 1999.


--- PAGE 46 ---

500
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Speciﬁc References
Adler, O., and Adler, R., The Reaction of Certain Organic Compounds with Blood, With Particular
Reference to Blood Identiﬁcation, Hoppe-Seyler’s Z. Physiol. Chem., 41, 59, 1904. Translation
in Gaensslen, R.E. Sourcebook in Forensic Serology, Immunology and Biochemistry, U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, Unit 9, 1983.
ABACard, HemaTrace, Abacus Diagnostics, product literature, 1998.
Bell, G.H., Breslin, P., and Lemen, R., Eds., Health Hazard Alert: Benzidine-, O-tolidine, and O-
dianisidine-based Dyes, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No. 81-106, U.S. Department of Labor
and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1980.
Budowle, B., Leggitt, J.L., Defanbaugh, D.A., Keys, K.M., Malkiewicz, S.F., The Presumptive Reagent
Fluorescein for the Detection of Dilute Bloodstains and Subsequent STR Typing of Recovered
DNA, J. Forensic Sci., 45, 1090, 2000.
Cheeseman, R., and DiMeo, L.A., Fluorescein as a Field-Worthy Latent Bloodstain Detection System,
J. Forensic Ident., 45, 631–646, 1995.
Cheeseman, R., Direct Sensitivity Comparison of the Fluorescein and Luminol Bloodstain Enhance-
ment Techniques, J. Forensic. Ident., 49, 261–268, 1999.
Cheeseman, R., and Tomboc, R., Fluorescein Techinque Performance Study on Bloody Foot Trails,
J. Forensic Ident., 51, 16–27, 2001.
Cox, M., A Study of the Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity of Four Presumptive Tests for Blood, J For. Sci.,
36, 1503, 1991.
Curtius, T., and Semper, A., Verhalten des 1-äthylesters der 3-notro-benzol-1,2-dicarbonsäure gegen
hydrazin, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 46, 1162, 1913.
Dilling, W.J., Haemochromogen crystal test for blood, Brit. Med. J., 1, 219, 1926.
Fleig, C., Nouvelle reaction, a la ﬂuorescine, pour la recherche du sang, en particulier dans l=urine,
C.R. Soc. Biol. 69, 192–194, 1910.
Garner, D.D., Cano, K.M., Peimer, R.S., and Yeshion, T.E., An Evaluation of Tetramethylbenzidine
as a Presumptive Test for Blood, J. Forensic Sci., 21, 816–821, 1979.
Gimeno, F.E., and Rini, G.A., Fill Flash Luminescence to Photograph Luminol Blood Stain Patterns,
J. Forensic Ident., 39, 149–156, 1989a.
Gimeno, F.E., Fill Flash Color Photography to Photograph Luminol Blood Stain Patterns, J. Forensic
Ident., 39, 305–306, 1989b.
Grispino, R.R.J., The Effect of Luminol on the Serological Analysis of Dried Human Bloodstains,
Crime Laboratory Digest, 17, 13–23, 1990.
Gross, A.M., Harris, K.A., and Kaldun,G.L., The Effect of Luminol on Presumptive Tests and DNA
Analysis Using the Polymerase Chain Reaction, J. For. Sci., 44, 8837–840, 1999.
Harrow, B., Borek, E., Mazur, A., Stone, G.C.H., Wagreich, H., Laboratory Manual of Biochemistry,
5th ed., W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 75, 1960.
Hatch, A.L., A Modiﬁed Reagent for the Conﬁrmation of Blood, J. For. Sci., 38, 1502–1506, 1993.
Higaki, R.S., and Philp, W.M.S., A Study of the Sensitivity, Stability and Speciﬁcity of Phenolphtha-
lein as an Indicator Test for Blood, Can. Soc. Forens. Sci. J., 9, 97, 1976.
Hochmeister, M.N., Budowle, B., and Baechtel, F.S., Effects of Presumptive test reagents on the
Ability to Obtain Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) Patterns from Human
Blood and Semen Stains, J. Forensic Sci., 35, 656, 1991.
Hochmeister, M.N., Budowle, B., Sparkes, R., Rudin, O., Gehrig, C., Thali, M., Schmidt, L., Cordier,
A., and Dirnhofer, R., Validation Studies of an Immunochromatographic 1-Step Test for the
Forensic Identiﬁcation of Human Blood, J. Forensic Sci., 44, 597–602, 1999.


--- PAGE 47 ---

References
501
Holland, V.R., Saunders, B.C., Rose, F. and Walpole, A., A Safer Substitute for Benzidine in the
Detection of Blood, Tetrahedron, 30, 3299, 1974.
Hunt, A.C., Corby, C., Dodd, B.E., and Camps, F.E., The Identiﬁcation of Human Blood Stains: A
Critical Survey, J. For. Med., 7, 112, 1960.
Huntress, E.H., Stanley, L.N., and Parker, A.S., The preparation of 3-aminophthalhydrazide for use
in the demonstration of chemiluminescence, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 56, 241, 1934.
Johnston, S., Newman, J., and Frappier, R., Validation Study of the Abacus Diagnostics ABAcard®
HemaTrace® Membrane Test for the Forensic Identiﬁcation of Human Blood, Can. Soc. For.
Sci. J., 36, 2003.
Kastle, J.H., and Shedd, O.M., Phenolphthalein as a Reagent for the Oxidizing Ferments, Am.
Chem. J., 26, 526, 1901.
Kastle, J.H., and Amoss, H.L., Variations in the Peroxidase Activity of the Blood in Health and Disease,
Bulletin No. 31, U.S. Hygienic Laboratory, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington,
DC, 1906. 
Kerr, D.J.A., and Mason, V.H., The haemochromogen crystal test for blood, Brit. Med. J., 1, 134, 1926.
Kirk, P.L., Crime Investigation, Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York, 105, 1963.
Laux, D.L., Effects of Luminol on Subsequent Analysis of Bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci., 36, 1512–1520,
1991.
Lee, H.C., and DeForest, P.R., The Use of Anti-human Hb Serum for Bloodstain Identiﬁcation,
Presented at 29th Annual Meeting, American Academy of Forensic Sciences, San Diego, 1977. 
Lee, H.C., Identiﬁcation and Grouping of Bloodstains, In Saferstein, R., Ed., Forensic Science Hand-
book, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Chapter 7, 1982.
Loy, T.H., and Wood, A.R., Blood Analysis at Çayönü Tepesi, Turkey, J. Field Archeol., 16, 451–460, 1989.
Lytle, L.T., and Hedgecock, D.G., Chemiluminescence in the Visualization of Forensic Bloodstains,
J. Forensic Sci., 23, 550, 1978.
Macey, H.L., The Identiﬁcation of Human Blood in a 166 Year Old Stain, Can Soc. For. Sci. J., 12,
191–193, 1979.
Material Safety Data Sheet, Fluorescein, Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc., Phillipsburg, NJ, 1999.
Material Safety Data Sheet, 3 aminophthalhydrazide (Luminol), Fluka Chemical Corp., Milwaukee,
WI, 2001.
Miles Laboratories, Product Literature, Hemastix, 1981 and 1992.
Ouchterlony, O., Antigen-antibody Reactions in Gels, Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand., 26, 507, 1949.
Ouchterlony, O., Handbook of Immunodiffusion and Immunoelectrophoresis, An Arbor Science Pub-
lishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Chapter 5, 1968.
Ponce, A.C., and Verdu Pascual, F.A., Critical Revision of Presumptive Tests for Bloodstains, Forensic
Science Communications, 1, #2, 1999.
Proescher, F., and Moody, A.M., Detection of blood by means of chemiluminescence, J. Lab. Clin.
Med., 24, 1183, 1939.
RCMP, Fingerprint Development Techniques, www.rcmp.ca/ﬁrs/recipes/leucomalachite_e.htm,
2001. 
Reynolds, M., The ABAcard® Hematrace®: Conﬁrmatory Identiﬁcation of Human Blood Located at
Crime Scenes, International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts News, 20(2), June 2004.
Silenieks, E., Atkinson, C., and Pearman, C., Use of the ABAcard® Hematrace® for the Detection
of Higher Primate Blood in Bloodstains, 17th International Symposium on the Forensic
Sciences, Wellington, New Zealand, 2004.


--- PAGE 48 ---

502
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Spear, T.F., and Brinkley, S.A., The HemeSelect™ Test: A Simple and Sensitive Forensic Species Test,
J. Forensic Sci. Soc., 34, 41–46, 1994.
Sutton, T.P., Presumptive Blood Testing, In James, S.H., Ed., Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of
Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, Chapter 4, 1999.
Takayama, M., A Method for Identifying Blood by Hemochromogen Crystallization, Kokka Igakkai
Zasshi, No. 306, 463-481, 1912, Translation in Gaensslen, R.E., Sourcebook in Forensic Serology,
Immunology and Biochemistry, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, Unit 9,
1983.
Teichmann, L., Concerning the Crystallization of Organic Components of Blood,  Z. Ration. Med.,
3, 375–388, 1853. Translation printed in presented in Gaensslen, R.E., Sourcebook in Forensic
Serology, Immunology and Biochemistry, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC,
Unit 9, 1983.
Vandenberg, N., and McMahon, K., Evaluation of OneStep® ABAcard® p30 and Hematrace® Tests
for use in Forensic Casework, 17th International Symposium on the Forensic Sciences,
Wellington, New Zealand, 2004.
Zweidinger, R.A., Lytle, L.T., and Pitt, C.G., Photography of Bloodstains Visualized by Luminol,
J. Forensic Sci., 18, 296, 1973. 
Luminol
Albrecht, H.O., Uber die Chemiluminescenz des Aminophthalaurehydrazids. Z. Phys. Chem.
(Leipzig), 136:321–330, 1928.
Ballou, S.M., Moves of Murder. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 40(4):675–680, 1995.
Cresap, T.R., et al. 1995. The Effects of Luminol and Coomassie Blue on DNA typing by PCR.
Presented at the 47th annual American Academy of Forensic Sciences Meeting, Seattle, WA,
1995.
Della Manna, A., and Montpetit, S., A Novel Approach to Obtaining Reliable PCR Results from
Luminol Treated Bloodstains. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 45(4):886–890, 2000.
Duncan, G.T., Seiden, H., Vallee, L., and Ferraro, D., Effects of Superglue, Other Fingerprint
Developing Agents, and Luminol on Bloodstain Analysis. Journal Assoc. Anal. Chem., 69(4):
677–680, 1986.
Erdey, L., Pickering, W.F., and Wilson, C.L., Mixed Chemiluminescent Indicators. Talanta,
9:371–375, 1962.
Fregeau, C.J., Germain, O., and Fourney, R.M., Fingerprint Enhancement Revisited and the Effects
of Blood Enhancement Chemicals on Subsequent Proﬁler Plus™ Fluorescent Short Tandem
Repeat DNA Analysis of Fresh and Aged Bloody Fingerprints. Journal of Forensic Sciences,
45(2):354–379, 2000.
Gaensslen, R.E., Sourcebook in Forensic Serology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1983.
Gill, S.K., New Developments in Chemiluminescence Research. Aldrichimica Acta, 16:59–61,
1983.
Gimeno, F.E., Fill Flash Color Photography to Photograph Luminol Bloodstain Patterns. Journal
Forensic Identiﬁcation, 39:305–306, 1989.
Gimeno, F.E., and Rini, G.A., Fill Flash Photo Luminescence to Photograph Luminol Blood Stain
Patterns. Journal Forensic Identiﬁcation, 39:149–156, 1989.


--- PAGE 49 ---

References
503
Gleu, K., and Pfannstiel, K., Uber 3-Aminophthalsaure-hydrazid. J. Prakt. Chem., 146:137–150,
1936.
Grispino, R.R.J., The Effect of Luminol on the Serological Analysis of Dried Human Bloodstains.
Crime Laboratory Digest, 17(1):13–23, 1990.
Grodsky, M., Wright, K., and Kirk, P.L., Simpliﬁed Preliminary Blood Testing. An Improved Technique
and Comparative Study of Methods. J. Crim. Law Criminol. Police Science, 42:95–104, 1951.
Gross, A.M., Harris, K.A., and Kaldun, G.L., The Effect of Luminol on Presumptive Tests and DNA
Analysis Using the Polymerase Chain Reaction. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 44(4):837–840,
1999.
Gundermann, K.D., Chemiluminescence in Organic Compounds. Angewandte Chemie (Interna-
tional Edition), 4:566–573, 1965.
Hochmeister, M.N., Budowle, B., and Baechtel, F.S., Effects of Presumptive Test Reagents on the
Ability to Obtain Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) Patterns from Human
Blood and Semen Stains. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 36(3):656–661, 1991.
Hochmeister, M.N., Budowle, B., Sparkes, R., Rudin, O., Gehrig, C., Thali, M., Schmidt, L., Cordier,
A., and Dirnhofer, R., Validation Studies of an Immunochromatographic 1-Step Test for
the Forensic Identiﬁcation of Human Blood. Journal of Forensic Sciences (44)3:597–601,
1999.
Huntress, E.H., Stanley, L.N., and Parker, A.S., The Preparation of 3-Aminophthalhydrazide For
Use in The Demonstration of Chemiluminescence. J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 56:241–242, 1934.
Laux, D.L., Effects of Luminol on the Subsequent Analysis of Bloodstains. Journal of Forensic Sciences,
36(5):1512–1520, 1991.
Lytle, L.T., and Hedgecock, D.G., Chemiluminescence in the Visualization of Forensic Bloodstains.
Journal of Forensic Sciences, 23:550–555, 1978.
McGrath, J., The Chemical Luminescence Test For Blood. British Medical Journal, 2:156–157, 1942.
Niebauer, J.C., Booth, J.B., and Brewer, B.L., Recording Luminol Luminescence in its Context Using
a Film Overlay Method. J. Forensic Ident., 40(5):271–278, 1990.
Proescher, F., and Moody, A.M., Detection of Blood By Means of Chemiluminescence. J. Lab. Clin.
Med., 24:1183–1189, 1939.
Specht, W., The Chemiluminescence of Hemin: An Aid For Finding and Recognizing Blood Stains
Important For Forensic Purposes. Angewante Chemie, 50:155–157, 1937.
Tamamushi, B., and Akiyama, H., Mechanism of the Chemiluminescence of 3-Aminophthalhy-
drazide. Zeitschrift Fuer Physikalische Chemie, 38:400–406, 1938.
Thornton, J.I., and Maloney, R.S., The Chemistry of the Luminol Reaction: Where to From Here?
Calif. Assoc. Crim. Newsletter, Sept:9–16, 1985.
Thornton, J.I., and Murdock, J.E., Photography of Luminol Reaction in Crime Scenes. Criminol.,
10(37):15–19, 1977.
Weber, K., Die Anwendung der Chemiluminescenz des Luminols in der gerichtlichen Medizin und
Toxicologie. I. Der Nachweis von Blutspuren. Z. Gesamte Gerichtl. Med., 57:410–423, 1966.
White, E.H., The Chemiluminescence of Luminol. In McElroy, W.D., and Glass, B. Eds., Light and
Life, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD, 1961, pp. 183–195.
White, E.H., and Bursey, M.M., Chemiluminescence of Luminol and Related Hydrazides: The Light
Emission Step. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86:941–942, 1964.
Zweidinger, R.A., Lytle, L.T., and Pitt, C.G., Photography of Bloodstains Visualized By Luminol.
Journal of Forensic Sciences, 18:296–302, 1973.


--- PAGE 50 ---

504
Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice
Chemical Enhancement of Latent Blood Impressions
Bergeron, J., Development of bloody prints on dark surfaces with titanium dioxide and methanol,
Journal of Forensic Identiﬁcation, No. 53, 2003. 
Bodziak, W.J., Footwear Impression Evidence, 2nd ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2000.
Eversdijk, M., and Gelderman, R., Shedding Fresh Light at the Scene of the Crime, Information
Bulletin for Shoeprint/Toolmark Examiners, Vol. 6, No. 1, March 2000.
Eversdijk, M., Gelderman, R., Nieuw Licht op de Plaats Delict, Modus, Jaargang 8, No. 4, September
1999.
Grodsky, Wright, M.K. and Kirk, P.L. Simpliﬁed Preliminary Blood Testing. An Improved Technique
and Comparative Study of Methods, Journal of the American Institute of Criminal Law and
Criminology, Vol. 42, 1951.
Manual of Fingerprints Development Techniques, Police Scientiﬁc Development Branch, Home
Ofﬁce Police Policy Derectorate, 2nd ed., 1998.
Sears, V.G., Prizeman, T.M., Enhancement of Fingerprints in Blood—Part1: The Optimization of
Amido Black, Journal of Forensic Identiﬁcation, Vol. 50, No. 5, 2000.
Spence, L., Asmussen G., Spectral Enhancement of Leucocrystal Violet Treated Footwear Impression
Evidence in Blood, Forensic Science International, No. 132, 2003. 
Teeuwen, A.B.E., van Barneveld, S., Drok, J.W., Keereweer, I. Limborgh, J.C.M., Naber, W.M., and
Velders, T., Enhancement of Footwear Impressions in Blood, Forensic Science International,
No. 95, 1998. 
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Processing Guide for Developing Latent
Prints.
