

--- PAGE 1 ---

PAPER
CRIMINALISTICS
Michael C. Taylor,1 Ph.D.; Terry L. Laber,2 B.S.; Paul E. Kish,3 M.Sc.; Glynn Owens,4 Ph.D.; and
Nikola K. P. Osborne,5 Ph.D.
The Reliability of Pattern Classification in
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, Part 1: Bloodstain
Patterns on Rigid Non-absorbent Surfaces*
ABSTRACT: This study was designed to produce the first baseline measure of reliability in bloodstain pattern classification. A panel of
experienced bloodstain pattern analysts examined over 400 spatter patterns on three rigid non-absorbent surfaces. The patterns varied in spatter
type and extent. A case summary accompanied each pattern that either contained neutral information, information to suggest the correct pattern
(i.e., was positively biasing), or information to suggest an incorrect pattern (i.e., was negatively biasing). Across the variables under examina-
tion, 13% of classifications were erroneous. Generally speaking, where the pattern was more difficult to recognize (e.g., limited staining extent
or a patterned substrate), analysts became more conservative in their judgment, opting to be inconclusive. Incorrect classifications increased as
a function of the negatively biasing contextual information. The implications of the findings for practice are discussed.
KEYWORDS: forensic science, bloodstain pattern analysis, error rate, reliability, contextual bias, cognitive science
Bloodstains are a common by-product of violent crime, and
analysis of these stains is a vital part of a crime scene investiga-
tion. Despite the fact that DNA analysis can now routinely iden-
tify the individuals that have bled at a scene, other important
questions can remain unanswered. For example, it is not uncom-
mon for a suspect to claim that the blood found on his/her cloth-
ing was deposited when he/she was trying to aid the victim. In
these situations, understanding the mechanism by which the
stains were deposited onto an article of clothing could be more
informative than knowing from whom the blood originated. This
is where the analysis of bloodstain patterns can often give valu-
able clues as to how the blood came to be where it was found.
Although the dynamics of the formation of a bloodstain pat-
tern appear to be infinitely variable, it is nevertheless true that
bloodstain patterns have reproducible characteristics that allow a
connection to be made between the distribution of bloodstains
and the underlying mechanism of their formation. Thus, at the
heart of bloodstain pattern analysis (BPA) is the recognition and
classification of the bloodstain pattern.
BPA has been used in criminal investigations since the 1800s.
Like many other disciplines from the early days of forensic
science, its use and acceptance occurred without rigorous valida-
tion. The Organization of Scientific Area Committees (OSAC)
BPA Subcommittee (previously the Scientific Working Group
on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN)) has made valu-
able progress in setting standards for training and education, ter-
minology, quality assurance, and validation of new procedures
for the discipline (1–3). Like other forensic practitioners, how-
ever, bloodstain pattern analysts are grappling with the problem
of assessing the reliability of the methodology that they use. At
this time, very little is known about this beyond the instincts of
experienced instructors and investigators who have observed the
reproducibility of bloodstain patterns over many crime scenes
and practical sessions in the classroom. While such experience
has served as the main basis for assessing the reliability of BPA
testimony in the past, the courts now rightly demand much
more. Indeed, establishing accuracy and reliability measures in
forensic disciplines was a key recommendation in the National
Research Council’s 2009 (4) report on the state of forensic
science.
There are several factors that may influence the reliability of
bloodstain pattern classifications. First, different bloodletting
mechanisms can give rise to bloodstain patterns that possess
similar or indistinguishable characteristics. For example blunt
force impact and expiration patterns (2) can both feature small
bloodstains and as such may be confused with one another. Sec-
ond, at times, a pattern might only comprise one, or a small
number of stains, meaning an analyst must decide if he/she has
sufficient data to make a reliable classification. Finally, the sur-
1Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited (ESR), PO
Box 29-181, Christchurch, New Zealand.
2Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA), 1430 Maryland Ave
East, St Paul, MN 55106.
3Forensic Consultant & Associates, PO Box 814, Corning, NY 14830.
4School of Psychology, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019,
Auckland 1142, New Zealand.
5Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited (ESR), PO
Box 29-181, Christchurch, New Zealand.
*Supported by a research grant from the National Institute of Justice
(Award # 2010-DN-BX-K213). Presented at the International Association of
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts (IABPA) Training Conference, October 1-4,
2013, in San Diego, CA.
Received 8 June 2015; and in revised form 6 Oct. 2015; accepted 17 Oct.
2015.
922
© 2016 American Academy of Forensic Sciences
J Forensic Sci, July 2016, Vol. 61, No. 4
doi: 10.1111/1556-4029.13091
Available online at: onlinelibrary.wiley.com


--- PAGE 2 ---

face characteristics of the substrate on which the bloodstain is
created, whether a rigid smooth surface or an absorbent fabric,
might add another level of complexity to the pattern recognition
task. These issues have been highlighted in several high profile
homicide trials in which bloodstain pattern analysts have found
themselves at the center of controversial arguments relating to
the explanation of the mechanisms that produce very small
bloodstains on clothing (5,6).
Although the size and distribution of individual bloodstains
are often measured, pattern recognition methods rely primarily
on a qualitative assessment of the appearance of the pattern. It is
essential therefore that these methods are well understood, their
reliability is demonstrable and that any bloodstain pattern con-
clusion proffered can be supported by statements that guide the
courts in their assessment of the extent of that reliability.
One of the complications for any study of method reliability
is the variability in the methods used. At this time, there is no
discipline standard in the methodology employed by bloodstain
pattern analysts. Two suggestions have been made to meet this
need (7,8), but so far no significant effort has been made to
establish these or any other approaches as standards. In fact, it is
possible that some bloodstain pattern analysts would struggle to
articulate the methodology that they employ.
Testing the reliability of BPA methods is not a straightforward
task. For example, it is generally impossible to know with cer-
tainty the “true” mechanistic cause of a bloodstain pattern at a
crime scene. For this reason, procedures to test method reliability
are limited to artificially created scenarios for which the ground
truth can be known. This approach has the risk of under or over
estimating identification errors because some of the dynamics
present in a real case investigation are lacking.
When considering the reliability of any forensic method, it is
important to assess whether factors outside of the evidence can
influence the reliability of interpretations. In particular, a grow-
ing body of research has demonstrated that expert interpretations
may be influenced by the presentation of contextual information
(9–18).
Perhaps more so than in any other forensic discipline, contex-
tual information is a necessary part of BPA. That is because
bloodstain patterns are analyzed in the context of a case with the
objective to assist with the reconstruction of events. This means
that once the pattern is classified, its relevance to the case inves-
tigation must be considered. These two processes (pattern classi-
fication and scene reconstruction) frequently overlap. At present,
there is no rigorous protocol for BPA that distinguishes these
processes. This means that, at an early stage of the analysis, ana-
lysts may consider additional case-specific information, such as
medical findings, case circumstances, and even witness testi-
mony. If the BPA methodology is not reliable, this integration
of case information may create a fertile breeding ground for con-
textual bias (19).
The Present Study
The research hypothesis at the heart of this study was as fol-
lows: Pattern recognition methods employed in BPA are reliable
when used by fully competent analysts.
To test this, a panel of experienced bloodstain pattern analysts
classified a series of bloodstain spatter patterns. These patterns
included stains made under a variety of conditions relevant to a
crime scene and included some sets of stains produced under
“ideal” conditions. That is to say, patterns produced to provide
the maximum chance of accurate classification. While it is
acknowledged that training and experience are important ingredi-
ents in the accurate conclusions reached by forensic analysts, the
approach used here was designed to help define the upper limit
of pattern classification reliability by focusing attention on
method reliability rather than analyst competency.
The type of pattern, pattern extent, the nature of the substrate,
and the direction of contextual cues were varied in a balanced
experiment designed to determine the effect of these variables
on pattern classification accuracy.
Method
Participants
Participants were 27 bloodstain pattern analysts from North
America, Australasia (New Zealand and Australia), and Europe.
All were invited based on their experience and standing within
the BPA community and were required to meet the following
three criteria: (i) must have completed at least 80 h training in
BPA, (ii) have been active in BPA casework for a minimum of
5 years, (iii) and be qualified by a court as an expert in BPA
and have provided expert testimony.
Materials
Bloodstain pattern targets (40 cm 9 40 cm) were prepared in
a controlled laboratory setting at the Minnesota Bureau of Crimi-
nal Apprehension (BCA). This size was chosen to aid with ship-
ping the materials to study participants. The completed targets
were coated with a clear lacquer to prevent deterioration and to
assist with biohazard safety. This coating meant that no chemical
tests to identify blood or saliva were possible. Participants were
expected to assume that any visible red-brown stains were
indeed bloodstains.
Three variables were manipulated when preparing the blood-
stain pattern targets: type of pattern, pattern extent, and target
substrate.
Type of Pattern—One of four different bloodstain pattern types
were prepared for each target: blunt force impact spatter, firearms-
related (back or forward) spatter, cast-off pattern, and expirated
spatter. These spatter pattern types were chosen to reflect the poten-
tial for overlap in pattern characteristics between pattern types,
which can be problematic for bloodstain pattern analysts, and were
designed to represent those typically encountered at crime scenes.
Cast-off pattern and blunt force impact spatter targets were
made with fresh human blood, donated by project volunteers.
Blood was drawn into tubes containing EDTA anticoagulant and
was used within 7 days of drawing. Blood for the firearms-
related spatter was purchased from Memorial Blood Center, 737
Pelham Boulevard, Saint Paul, MN 55114, and was used within
30 days of drawing. Blood for the expirated patterns was drawn
from an experimenter on the same day it was used and was used
unrefrigerated. To represent the variability found in crime scenes
and to create varied pattern extents, two methods were used to
create each pattern type (Tables 1–4). Targets were mounted on
a vertical surface during preparation.
Pattern Extent—The extent of pattern on each target was cate-
gorized into three levels: minimum, medium, and maximum. Cat-
egory membership was determined by an approximation of the
total number of stains in the pattern and the number of stains
larger than 1 mm in diameter (see Table 5).
TAYLOR ET AL. . CLASSIFICATION RELIABILITY IN BPA
923
 15564029, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1556-4029.13091 by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 3 ---

Substrate—Targets were one of three different rigid-surface
substrates designed to represent varying levels of anticipated
identification difficulty; paint, wallpaper, and chipboard. Two
coats of white Zinsser 1-2-3 primer were used for the painted
substrate. The wallpaper was white Brewster Easy Texture pain-
table wallpaper (STRIA Pattern 99417F), with one coat of Zins-
ser
1-2-3
primer.
The
target
was
rotated
during
pattern
construction so that the wallpaper texture ran vertically. The
chipboard surface was made from oriented strand board (OSB),
which comprises wood logs (e.g., pines and aspen) that are
chipped and oriented in random directions.
Contextual Information—In addition to varying the type of
bloodstain pattern, pattern extent, and target substrate, case sum-
maries were created to manipulate the contextual information asso-
ciated with each target. Contextual information was presented in
the form of a short vignette that provided background information
about how the bloodstain pattern was found and what was known
about the case. This included information such as eyewitness
reports, the position of the pattern/victim, injuries sustained by the
victim, and any weapons that were found or assumed to have been
used. All scenarios indicted a single bleeder and included a DNA
result. The scenario either contained information that supported the
correct classification (positively biasing), was misleading toward a
particular incorrect classification (negatively biasing), or contained
no directional information (neutral). No analyst received the same
vignette twice. Two examples are given in Table 6.
Procedure
Analysts were initially invited via email. In both the invitation
email and in a letter to the analysts after they had agreed to par-
ticipate, they were informed that the aim of the study was not to
test competency, but rather the reliability of BPA methodology.
Furthermore, they were informed that all responses would
remain anonymous and could in no way be linked to any speci-
fic analyst. To further ensure anonymity, an independent third-
party liaised with study participants.
TABLE 1––Methods used to create blunt force impact spatter. For both pat-
tern-creating methods, multiple targets were positioned 50 cm from the front,
side, and back of a striking zone.
Method 1
One drop of blood was placed on a wooden block in the center
of the striking zone. A hammer was propelled by rubber bands
and gravity onto the blood pool. This method tended to produce
fine horizontally directed spatter
Method 2
Six drops of blood were placed on a wooden block to the right
side of the center of the striking zone and extending outside of
that zone. The hammer was allowed to fall under gravity alone
onto the blood pool. This method tended to produce larger
spatter stains that travelled higher on the adjacent vertical
surface
TABLE 2––Methods used to create cast-off bloodstain patterns.
Method 1
A wrench was liberally coated in blood and then swung a few
times to remove excess blood. An experimenter stood
approximately 130 cm from the left and front walls that held the
targets and swung the wrench forcibly from left to right, on an
angle, and overhead and downwards. This method tended to
produce large stains with a broadly linear distribution
Method 2
A small knife was dipped a few millimeters into a beaker of
blood and tapped one to two times to remove excess blood.
An experimenter then stood approximately 85 cm from the left
wall and 130 cm from the front wall and swung the knife
forcibly toward the targets. This method tended to give smaller
spatter stains in a tightly linear distribution
TABLE 3––Methods used to create expirated bloodstain patterns.
Method 1
An experimenter transferred blood to his lips with a finger and
blew air gently through tightly pursed lips directly toward the
targets, which were mounted 15–20 cm from him. This method
tended to produce smaller stains and generally lacked mucus
strands
Method 2
An experimenter took a small volume of blood (<1 mL) and
mixed it gently with saliva before coughing from the front of
the mouth directly toward the targets, which were mounted
50–90 cm from him. This method tended to give a larger
range of spatter sizes and frequently contained mucus strands
TABLE 4––Methods used to create firearms-related bloodstain patterns. For
both methods, a 0.22 caliber bullet was fired from a pistol through a blood-
soaked sponge. Some targets required multiple shots to obtain the desired
amount of pattern.
Method 1
Back spatter was collected from targets positioned 120 cm in
front of a blood-soaked sponge
Method 2
Forward spatter was collected from targets positioned 120 cm to
the rear of the sponge
TABLE 5––Thresholds for determining pattern extent.
Total N Stains
N Stains > 1 mm
Extent
<50*
<10
Minimum
<50
>10
Medium
50–500
<50
Medium
50–500
>50
Maximum
>500
Maximum
*For cast-off patterns, a minimum pattern was deemed to be fewer than
four tightly linear stains, or fewer than 10 broadly linear stains. If there were
more than 10 linear stains, the pattern was considered to have medium extent.
TABLE 6––Example of contextual information.
Example scenario containing contextual information* to suggest the
pattern is the result of expirated blood
Police were called to a late-night disturbance outside an inner-city club. On
arrival, they found the body of a 23-year-old man in a dark alleyway, with
a crowd of youths standing nearby watching the paramedics, who comment
that they thought the man died from severe internal injuries following a
beating. The man’s external bloodletting injuries were confined to his nose
and mouth. An officer noticed bloodstains on the side door of the club. The
club owner was interviewed and told police that he had not been present
during the disturbance but had heard the noise and had come outside and
saw the deceased lying in the alleyway and several youths running off. He
says the bloodstaining occurred when the victim was alive and was
coughing up blood. Police bring you a section of the door for your
bloodstain pattern examination. DNA tests confirm the blood on the door of
the club was from the 23-year-old victim found in the alleyway. You are
requested to determine the nature of the bloodstaining to confirm the club
owner’s account.
*If the target pattern was an expirated bloodstain pattern, this contextual
information would be considered positively biasing. If the target pattern was
a pattern other than expirated blood, then this contextual information would
be considered negatively biasing.
Example scenario containing neutral contextual information
Police get a call from a hotel manager who reports that one of her cleaning
staff found bloodstains on the wall in one of the hotel rooms during a
routine room service. She reports that the guest who occupied the room had
checked out. The police locate the guest who denies all knowledge of the
blood and appears to be able to account for all his movements during his
stay. A DNA test shows the blood in the room is not from him. Police have
brought you this sample from the room and asked you to examine it to help
determine the significance of the pattern present.
924
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 15564029, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1556-4029.13091 by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 4 ---

Materials were only sent to analysts after they had indicated a
willingness to participate. Each analyst received 15 or 16 targets,
and a response sheet associated with each target. A number was
placed at the top of each target; this identified which target cor-
responded to each response sheet and indicated the pattern align-
ment during pattern construction. No two analysts received the
same targets.
Each of the manipulated variables was counterbalanced across
the other variables and across the entire sample.
The response sheet included the following instructions: “You
are preparing your final report for investigators, which could
end up being presented in court. Please give your opinion as to
the pattern type or types that could account for the stains on the
sample target.”
A list of pattern types, along with SWGSTAIN definitions,
was provided as follows: cast-off, drip trail, impact, saturation,
splash, transfer, drip, expiration, pool, spatter from gunshot
trauma (forward or back spatter), swipe, insect stain, drip stain,
flow, projected (e.g., arterial), and wipe.
Analysts could select any number of patterns, or indicate that
“I can’t state that any of the above patterns would account for
the stains on the sample target.”
After classifying all target patterns, analysts emailed or posted
their responses to the independent third-party.
Results
Error and Accuracy Rate Determination
Analysts’ responses were considered correct if they selected
the pattern type that represented the true mechanistic cause for
pattern (or selected this pattern type among multiple selections).
Analysts’ responses were considered incorrect if the true pattern
type was not selected in their choice(s). If analysts could not state
that any of the listed patterns could account for the target pattern,
their responses were considered inconclusive. If analysts had clas-
sified the pattern by indicating all listed types as possible, these
responses would have been considered inconclusive; none did so.
Pattern Classification Accuracy
Twenty-seven analysts made judgements on 15–16 target pat-
terns each, yielding 416 unique assessments. Three assessments
were removed from the analysis because no response was provided;
413 responses remained. In total, analysts were correct for 69.5%
of classifications and made errors for 13.1% of classifications. The
remaining 17.4% of responses were inconclusive. Chi-squared (v2)
tests were performed to determine whether the frequency of correct,
incorrect,
and
inconclusive
responses
varied
significantly
(p < 0.05) as a function of each of the variables under examination.
Effect of Pattern Type
There was a significant overall difference in the frequency of ana-
lysts’ correct, incorrect, and inconclusive responses as a function of
pattern type, v2 (6, N = 413) = 13.871, p = 0.031. This was
mainly due to analysts’ success in identifying expirated patterns
(81% correct compared to 64–69% for the remaining types; Fig. 1).
Effect of Pattern Extent
There was a significant overall difference in the frequency of
correct, incorrect, and inconclusive responses as a function of
pattern extent, v2 (4, N = 413) = 26.74, p < 0.0001. As might
be expected, analysts’ accuracy improved as the extent of blood-
staining in the pattern (essentially the number of stains present
on the target) increased (Fig. 2). Rather than the decrease in
staining extent increasing analysts’ propensity to make errors,
the decrease in correct classifications was matched with an
increase in inconclusive classifications.
Effect of Target Substrate
There was a significant overall difference in the frequency of
correct, incorrect, and inconclusive responses as a function of
the substrate on which the bloodstain patterns were deposited, v2
(4, N = 413) = 38.64, p < 0.0001. Analysts made the greatest
number of correct classifications on the white-painted surface,
followed by the wallpaper surface (Fig. 3). The chipboard sur-
face resulted in the lowest proportion of correct responses and
greatest proportion of inconclusive responses. The chipboard sur-
face had a highly patterned finish with many surface features
that could have been confused with small bloodstains. Analysts
had little or no scope for using any enhancement methods that
might have assisted them with distinguishing bloodstains from
artefacts.
Analysts’
decrease
in
correct
classifications
was
matched by an increase in inconclusive classifications, rather
than an increase in erroneous classifications.
Effect of Contextual Information
There was a significant overall difference in the number of
correct, incorrect, and inconclusive responses as a function of
the direction of the contextual cues, v2 (4, N = 413) = 12.39,
FIG. 1––Proportion of response outcomes as a function of pattern type.
FIG. 2––Proportion of response outcomes as a function of pattern extent.
TAYLOR ET AL. . CLASSIFICATION RELIABILITY IN BPA
925
 15564029, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1556-4029.13091 by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 5 ---

p = 0.015 (Fig. 4). When a positive context was presented, ana-
lysts were less likely to make an incorrect classification than
when the context was neutral, with the overall error rate drop-
ping from 11% to 8%. Conversely, when a negative context was
presented analysts were more likely to make an incorrect classi-
fication than when the context was neutral, with the overall error
rate increasing to 20%. The rate of inconclusive decisions was
highest when the contextual information contained no directional
cues (21%), relative to when there were positively (15%) or neg-
atively biasing cues (16%).
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to assess the reliability of clas-
sification decisions in bloodstain pattern analysis. To do this,
well-trained and highly experienced analysts examined over 400
spatter patterns on rigid non-absorbent surfaces, representing sur-
faces frequently encountered at crime scenes. Four spatter pattern
types commonly encountered in crime scene investigations were
used. The extent of available pattern, the nature of the substrate,
and the type of contextual information were varied in a balanced
experiment designed to determine the effect of these variables
on pattern classification accuracy.
Analysts were required to classify the pattern to a standard
required for court. To do this, analysts were allowed to select
one or more pattern classifications that they determined could
not be excluded. Within the chosen range of conditions, the
17.4% overall rate of inconclusive decisions gives some measure
of interpretation difficulty for the patterns created in this study.
Where a classification was made, either by choosing a single
pattern or by nominating more than one pattern, 13.1% of these
classifications did not include the correct pattern type. This find-
ing can be considered the first approximation of an overall error
rate for bloodstain pattern classification on rigid non-absorbent
surfaces.
Some patterns were more reliably classified than others. In
particular, the error rate was 4% for expirated patterns compared
with 19% for impact patterns. The characteristic features of expi-
rated patterns (e.g., mucus strands and air bubbles) were gener-
ally evident within these patterns, which could explain why this
pattern type was the most recognizable. The second most recog-
nizable pattern type was cast-off spatter. Many of the distinctive
features of a cast-off pattern, such as a linear or curvilinear dis-
tribution of stains, were also generally present in the cast-off pat-
terns prepared in this study.
Other than a lack of distinctive features in a pattern, it is not
clear why the proportion of incorrect classifications for impact
and firearms-related spatter patterns was higher. It is possible
that the features that were observed in these patterns were those
shared by other pattern types. For example, many of the impact
patterns had a somewhat narrow distribution of stains, similar to
cast-off. Indeed, on closer observation of the data, many of the
impact patterns were incorrectly classified as cast-off. Firearms-
related spatter patterns in this study did not always have a large
proportion of the very small “mist” stains usually associated with
this pattern type, which may explain why firearms related spatter
was excluded as a mechanism for some of these patterns.
Looking more closely at the other variables used in this study,
it is evident that where the amount of available pattern was lim-
ited or the substrate made stain visualization more difficult (e.g.,
chipboard)
the
proportion
of
correctly
classified
patterns
decreased. However, the reduction in classification accuracy was
generally accompanied by an increase in the proportion of incon-
clusive responses. So where the pattern was more difficult to
recognize, analysts became more conservative in their judgment,
which is what is to be expected from a reliable method.
The error rates estimated from this study are based, in part, on
the conditions chosen for examination. These conditions were
designed to be a fair representation of real casework but remain
the subjective judgement of the experimenters. In particular, the
patterns used in the study were restricted to common spatter
types. Had other more easily recognized pattern types, such as
drip stains, drip patterns, transferred blood, and saturation pat-
terns been included, the proportion of correct classifications may
have been higher. In addition, the size of the targets meant that
in many cases the analysts received only a portion of the total
pattern. As well as reducing the number of bloodstains available
for analysis, the limited pattern size meant that it may not have
been possible to perform other analyses such as area of origin
determinations. Even with a small number of stains and only a
portion of the complete pattern available, however, many ana-
lysts were prepared to make a classification. Finally, the use of a
coating of lacquer removed the potential to perform any chemi-
cal tests on the bloodstains, which may have hindered analysts’
ability to confirm, for example, the presence of saliva to indicate
expirated blood. It is worth noting that some of these limitations
exist in casework, especially where analysts are working solely
from photographs. While any of these limitations could have
reduced the classification success rate, none would be expected
to increase erroneous classifications, because such errors mean
the correct pattern type has been excluded. Rather, an increase in
inconclusive classifications
would be
expected, which was
FIG. 4––Proportion of response outcomes as a function of direction of
contextual cues.
FIG. 3––Proportion of response outcomes as a function of target sub-
strate.
926
JOURNAL OF FORENSIC SCIENCES
 15564029, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1556-4029.13091 by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- PAGE 6 ---

indeed the observed outcome in this study for the pattern extent
and substrate limitations.
Of particular interest in this study was whether contextual
information can influence classification decisions. Indeed, where
a scenario was offered that deliberately pointed analysts toward
the correct classification, the proportion of misclassifications that
resulted was lower (8%) than that observed for patterns with
neutral scenarios (11%).
Of more concern, the proportion of misclassifications that
resulted when the contextual information pointed toward an incor-
rect pattern type was considerably higher (20%) than when the
contextual information was neutral (11%). This study, therefore,
has produced evidence that analysts consider contextual informa-
tion when classifying bloodstain patterns and that this information
can influence accuracy. These findings may be evidence for con-
firmation bias (19), where analysts interpreted the pattern in line
with the expectation created by the contextual cues.
In situations where data from a bloodstain pattern is limited, it
may be tempting for analysts to seek out contextual information
in order to help reach a decision. Unfortunately, contextual bias
is most likely to occur when data are ambiguous (20–24), and in
these situations, efforts to avoid contextual information are par-
ticularly important. The nature of forensic science is such that
analyses are rarely conducted without a degree of ambiguity and
the need to apply subjective judgements. With a reliable method-
ology, however, it should be possible to reach sound conclusions
even in the absence of ideal conditions.
Analysts’ use of contextual information to inform classifica-
tion decisions could reflect the fact that the boundary between
pattern classification and crime scene reconstruction is often
blurred. This blurred boundary is not helped by the fact that, at
present, there is not a rigorous protocol for BPA that distin-
guishes the two processes. This means that, at the stage of pat-
tern classification, additional case-specific information, such as
medical findings, case circumstances, and eye-witness statements
could influence pattern interpretation decisions (25). This prob-
lem is compounded by the fact that the BPA terminology used
to describe pattern classifications generally describe the mecha-
nism of pattern formation (e.g., cast-off, expiration). Thus classi-
fications actually form components of a reconstruction theory,
rather than purely representing a summary of pattern characteris-
tics. Moving forward, it could be advantageous for the BPA
community to agree on a standard methodology for the analysis
of bloodstain patterns that includes a better distinction between
classification and reconstruction, and on terminology that relies
less on mechanistic descriptions of patterns.
Conclusions
One significant implication of this study is the inference that
contextual information is being integrated into pattern classifica-
tion decisions. The assumption made here is that this is not a
competency issue, given that the participants in this study were
all experienced bloodstain pattern analysts. This vulnerability to
context effects justifies further investigation. Based on the find-
ings of this study, it seems prudent for practitioners and agencies
to take steps to minimize the effects of contextual information.
The practicalities of this may vary from agency to agency and
may not be straightforward, as many analysts are immersed in
an investigation in ways that make it difficult to control the flow
of information. However, further research efforts could see valid
contextual information management methods emerge.
A study of this sort has limitations, not the least of which is
the fact that analysts were not making decisions in the context
of a real case, with the associated demands of a court. Within
the restrictions of the study, however, a useful baseline has been
established for the expected error rate in bloodstain pattern clas-
sification.
References
1. Scientific Working Group on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis. Guidelines for
the minimum educational and training requirements for bloodstain pattern
analysts. Forensic Sci Commun 2008;10(1):1–5.
2. Scientific Working Group on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis. Recommended
terminology. Forensic Sci Commun 2009;11(2):1–3.
3. Scientific Working Group on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis. Guidelines for
a quality assurance program in bloodstain pattern analysis. Forensic Sci
Commun 2008;10(1):1–4.
4. National Research Council. Strengthening forensic science in the United
States: a path forward. Washington, DC: The National Academy of
Sciences, 2009.
5. Aguirre-Jarquin v. State. Supreme Court of Florida, 2014.
6. Camm v. State. NE 2d: Ind: Court of Appeals; 2011; 205.
7. Gardner RM. Defining a methodology for bloodstain pattern analysis. J
Forensic Identif 2006;56(4):549–57.
8. Saviano J. Articulating a concise scientific methodology for bloodstain
pattern analysis. J Forensic Identif 2005;55(4):461–70.
9. Dror IE, Charlton D, Peron AE. Contextual information renders experts
vulnerable to making erroneous identifications. Forensic Sci Int 2006;156
(1):74–8.
10. Dror IE, Hampikian G. Subjectivity and bias in forensic DNA mixture
interpretation. Sci Justice 2011;51(4):204–8.
11. Dror IE, Rosenthal R. Meta-analytically quantifying the reliability and
biasability of forensic experts. J Forensic Sci 2008;53(4):900–3.
12. Nakhaeizadeh S, Dror IE, Morgan RM. Cognitive bias in forensic
anthropology: visual assessment of skeletal remains is susceptible to con-
firmation bias. Sci Justice 2014;54(3):208–14.
13. Kerstholt J, Eikelboom A, Dijkman T, Stoel R, Hermsen R, van Leuven
B. Does suggestive information cause a confirmation bias in bullet com-
parisons? Forensic Sci Int 2010;198(1):138–42.
14. Dror IE, Wertheim K, Fraser-Mackenzie P, Walajtys J. The impact of
human–technology cooperation and distributed cognition in forensic
science: biasing effects of AFIS contextual information on human
experts. J Forensic Sci 2012;57(2):343–52.
15. Osborne NK, Woods S, Kieser J, Zajac R. Does contextual information
bias bitemark comparisons? Sci Justice 2014 Jul;54(4):267–73.
16. Kerstholt JH, Eikelboom AR. Effects of prior interpretation on situation
assessment in crime analysis. J Behav Decis Making 2007;20(5):455–65.
17. Kerstholt JH, Paashuis R, Sjerps M. Shoe print examinations: effects of
expectation, complexity and experience. Forensic Sci Int 2007;165(1):30–4.
18. Fraser-Mackenzie PA, Dror IE, Wertheim K. Cognitive and contextual
influences in determination of latent fingerprint suitability for identifica-
tion judgments. Sci Justice 2013 Jun;53(2):144–53.
19. Nickerson RS. Confirmation bias: a ubiquitous phenomenon in many
guises. Rev Gen Psychol 1998;2(2):175.
20. Andrews S, Bond R. Lexical expertise and reading skill: bottom-up and
top-down processing of lexical ambiguity. Read Writ 2009;22:687–711.
21. Bartels BL. Top-down and bottom-up models of judicial reasoning. In:
Klein DE, Mitchell G, editors. The psychology of judicial decision mak-
ing. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2010;41–56.
22. Ha YW, Hoch SJ. Ambiguity, processing strategy, and advertising-evi-
dence interactions. J Consumer Res 1989;16:354–60.
23. Giannelli PC. Confirmation bias. Criminal Justice 2007;22:60–1.
24. Osborne NK, Zajac R. An imperfect match? Crime-related context influ-
ences fingerprint decisions. Appl Cognitive Psychol 2015;30(1):126–34.
25. Jamieson A. A rational approach to the principles and practice of crime
scene investigation: I. Principles. Sci Justice 2004;44(1):3–7.
Additional information and reprint requests:
Michael C. Taylor, Ph.D.
Institute of Environmental Science and Research Ltd
PO Box 29181
Christchurch 8540
New Zealand
E-mail: michael.taylor@esr.cri.nz
TAYLOR ET AL. . CLASSIFICATION RELIABILITY IN BPA
927
 15564029, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1556-4029.13091 by <Shibboleth>-member@glyndwr.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
