

--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---

Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis Second Edition
With an Introduction to
Crime Scene Reconstruction


--- PAGE 3 ---

CRC SERIES IN
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF CRIMINAL
AND FORENSIC INVESTIGATIONS
VERNON J. GEBERTH, BBA, MPS, FBINA Series Editor
Practical  Homicide Investigation: Tactics, Procedures, and Forensic Techniques, Third Edition
Vernon J. Geberth
The Counterterrorism Handbook: Tactics, Procedures, and Techniques, Second Edition
Frank Bolz, Jr.,  Kenneth J. Dudonis, and David P. Schulz
Forensic Pathology, Second Edition
Dominick J. Di Maio and Vincent J. M. Di Maio
Interpretation of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, Second Edition
William G. Eckert and Stuart H. James
Tire Imprint Evidence
Peter McDonald
Practical Drug Enforcement: Procedures and Administration, Second Edition
Michael D. Lyman
Practical Aspects of Rape Investigation: A Multidisciplinary Approach, Third Edition
Robert R. Hazelwood and Ann Wolbert Burgess
The Sexual Exploitation of Children: A Practical Guide to Assessment, Investigation,
and Intervention, Second Edition
Seth L. Goldstein
Gunshot Wounds: Practical Aspects of Firearms, Ballistics, and Forensic Techniques,
Second Edition
Vincent J. M. Di Maio
Friction Ridge Skin: Comparison and Identification of Fingerprints
James F. Cowger
Footwear Impression Evidence, Second Edition
William J. Bodziak
Principles of Kinesic Interview and Interrogation
Stan Walters
Practical Fire and Arson Investigation, Second Edition
David R. Redsicker and John J. O’Connor
The Practical Methodology of Forensic Photography, Second Edition
David R. Redsicker
Practical Aspects of Interview and Interrogation, Second Edition
David E. Zulawski and Douglas E. Wicklander
Investigating Computer Crime
Franklin Clark and Ken Diliberto
Practical Homicide Investigation Checklist and Field Guide
Vernon J. Geberth
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruction,
Second Edition
Tom Bevel and Ross M. Gardner
Practical Aspects of Munchausen by Proxy and Munchausen Syndrome Investigation
Kathryn Artingstall
Quantitative-Qualitative Friction Ridge Analysis: An Introduction to Basic and Advanced
Ridgeology
David R. Ashbaugh


--- PAGE 4 ---

CRC PR ESS
Boca Raton   London   New York   Washington, D.C.
Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis Second Edition
With an Introduction to
Crime Scene Reconstruction
Tom Bevel
Ross M. Gardner


--- PAGE 5 ---

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material
is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors and the publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, microﬁlming, and recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
All rights reserved. Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the personal or
internal use of speciﬁc clients, may be granted by CRC Press LLC, provided that $1.50 per page
photocopied is paid directly to Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923
USA. The fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is ISBN 0-8493-0950-
6/02/$0.00+$1.50. The fee is subject to change without notice. For organizations that have been granted
a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
The consent of CRC Press LLC does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, for
creating new works, or for resale. Speciﬁc permission must be obtained in writing from CRC Press LLC
for such copying.
Direct all inquiries to CRC Press LLC, 2000 N.W. Corporate Blvd., Boca Raton, Florida 33431. 
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identiﬁcation and explanation, without intent to infringe.
Visit the CRC Press Web site at www.crcpress.com
© 2002 by CRC Press LLC 
No claim to original U.S. Government works
International Standard Book Number 0-8493-0950-6
Library of Congress Card Number 2001035882
Printed in the United States of America  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0
Printed on acid-free paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bevel, Tom
Bloodstain pattern analysis : with an introduction to crime scene reconstruction / Tom
Bevel, Ross M. Gardner.--2nd ed.
p.   cm. -- (CRC series in practical aspects of criminal and forensic investigations)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8493-0950-6 (alk. paper)
1. Bloodstains. 2. Forensic hematology. 3. Crime scene searches. I. Gardner, Ross M.
II. Title. III. Series.
HV8077.5.B56 2001
363.25¢62--dc21
2001035882


--- PAGE 6 ---

v
Contents
Foreword
xi
Preface
xv
Editor’s Note
xix
Acknowledgments
xxi
The Authors
xxv
1
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function 
and a Historical Perspective
1
The Function of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
1
The Relationship of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
to Crime Scene Reconstruction
2
Historical Perspective of Bloodstain Pattern Evidence
4
Early Scientiﬁc References
6
Modern Works in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
15
Summary
17
References
17
2
Crime Scene Analysis and Reconstruction
21
Correlating Crime Scene Analysis to Behavioral Analysis
23
Limitations in the Reconstruction of Crime
26
Application of the Scientiﬁc Method in the 
Reconstruction Process
28
A Conceptual Model for Analysis
33
Collection and the Generalist Attitude
34
Evaluation
34
Assessment
36
Integration
42
Event Analysis: A Process for Crime Scene Reconstruction
45
Event Flow Charting: Demonstrating the Result
50
The Role of Logic in Analysis
59
Expectations and Predictions
59


--- PAGE 7 ---

vi
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Impact of Dynamic Events on Reconstruction
60
Deductive vs. Inductive Reasoning
61
Informal Fallacies Encountered in Analysis
62
Putting the Pieces Together
64
References
65
3
Terminology
69
Referring to the Discipline
70
General Terms Relating to Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
71
Grouping Stains
71
Angle of Impact
71
Arterial Gushing and Spurts
73
Atomized Blood/Misting
74
Spatter
75
Clot
77
Capillary Action
78
Cast-Off Stains
80
Directionality
81
Directional Angle
82
Drawback/Blowback Effect
82
Drip Patterns
84
Expiratory Blood
85
Fly Spots
87
Flight Path
87
Impact Site
88
Origin/Point of Origin/Area of Origin
89
Parent Stain
89
Projected Blood
90
Ricochet Stain
91
Satellite Spatter
91
Shadowing/Ghosting/Void
91
Skeletonized Stain/Skeletonization
93
Spines
94
Splash
95
Passive Flow
97
Pattern Transfer
97
Saturation Stain
100
Swipe
102
Wipe
102
Velocity Impact Patterns
104
Low-Velocity Stains
104


--- PAGE 8 ---

vii
Medium-Velocity Impact Spatter
105
High-Velocity Impact Spatter
105
Summary
106
References
106
4
Understanding the Medium of Blood
107
General Properties of Blood
107
Blood Make-Up
108
The Body’s Response to Breaching of the Circulatory System
109
Circulatory System Considerations
111
Reaction of Liquid Blood to Force
111
Droplet Dynamics in Flight
112
Droplet Dynamics on Impact
120
Contact/Collapse
121
Displacement
122
Dispersion
128
Retraction
129
Liquid-to-Liquid Impacts
131
Stain Shape and Impact Angle Relationship
133
Summary
135
References
135
5
Determining Motion and Directionality
139
General Sequence of Events
139
Droplet Directionality
140
Recognizing Blood Trail Motion
147
Determining Motion from Wipes and Swipes
149
Repetitive Pattern Transfers
155
Flows
157
Summary
157
Reference
158
6
Determining the Point of Convergence 
and the Point of Origin
159
Determining Point of Convergence from Overhead
159
Determining Impact Angles
163
Stain Measurement
166
Determining Point of Origin Using Both Side 
and Overhead Views
176
Graphing Points of Origin 
179


--- PAGE 9 ---

viii
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Deﬁning Point of Origin with the Tangent Function
180
Limitations in Point of Origin Evaluations
182
Three-Dimensional Evaluations of Point of Origin
184
Stringing Scenes
184
Forensic Software Applications
186
Automation Efﬁciency or Precision 
— An Important Distinction
190
Summary
191
References
191
7
Evaluating Impact Spatter Bloodstains
193
Methods of Description
193
Understanding the Concept of Preponderant Stain Size
198
Distinguishing Spatter from Contact Stains 
201
Impact Droplet Size
204
Pattern Conﬁguration and Dispersion in Impacts
206
Spatter Resulting from Gunshots
211
Gunshot Spatter — Forward Spatter and Back Spatter
211
Size Ranges of Gunshot Spatter
213
Kinetic Energy, Wound Cavitation, and the Creation 
of Gunshot Spatter
215
Gunshot Pattern Shapes and Dispersion
216
Expiratory Blood
219
Fly Spots
221
Summary
222
References
223
8
Characteristic Blood Patterns That Aid 
in Analysis
225
Cast-Off Stains
225
Pattern Transfers
230
Projected Blood
237
Flow Patterns
239
Voids and Ghosting Patterns
243
Pools and Standing Blood
244
Blood Dripping into Blood
251
Patterns on Clothing and Fabric
253
Summary
255
References
257


--- PAGE 10 ---

ix
9
Documenting Bloodstains
259
The Function of Documentation
259
Collection
260
Detection of Blood
264
Presumptive Tests
264
Enhancement Techniques
265
Bloodstain Pattern Photography 
269
Scene and Pattern Sketches
283
Written Reports
286
Summary
294
References
295
10
Documenting the Reconstruction of a Crime
297
The Reconstruction Report
297
Event Analysis in Outline Format
299
Statement Comparison to Event Analysis
302
Event Analysis in Narrative Format
303
Guidelines for Maintaining Objectivity 
during Case-Speciﬁc Experiments
314
Re-creating Human Anatomy
315
Re-creating Event Particulars
315
Pitfalls to Re-creation/Reconstruction Attempts
316
Case Examples
316
Case Experimentation Example #1
316
Case Experimentation Example #2
319
Summary
321
Reference
321
11
Automation Applications in Bloodstain 
Pattern Analysis and Crime Scene 
Reconstruction
323
Automation Usage Considerations
323
Types of Applications
324
Tutorial Applications
324
Simulation and Computer-Aided Analysis Applications
325
Illustration Applications
328
Court Acceptance
335
Building Demonstrative Presentations 
Using Computer Resources
337
Summary
344


--- PAGE 11 ---

x
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
References
346
12
Presenting Evidence at Trial
349
General Concerns
349
Maintaining Objectivity
350
Settling in and Establishing a First Impression
351
Understanding Cross-Examination
353
Using Demonstrative Aids in Court
355
Summary
358
References
359
13
Dealing with the Risk of Bloodborne 
Pathogens
361
Bloodborne Diseases
361
Crime Scene Considerations
362
Dealing with Accidental Exposures
364
Packaging Biohazard Evidence
365
Exposure Risks in Training and Experimentation
365
Other Sources of Information on Managing Bloodborne 
Pathogen Risks
366
Summary
366
References
367
Appendix A:
Weight/Measure Conversion Table
369
Appendix B:
Trigonometric Functions and 
Their Application in Bloodstain 
Pattern Analysis
371
Accuracy, Precision, and Signiﬁcant Digits
375
References
377
Appendix C:
Stop-Motion Photography Techniques
379
Reference
380
Index
383


--- PAGE 12 ---

xi
Foreword
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruc-
tion, Second Edition, is a very clearly and concisely written text. In fact, it is
the most complete and comprehensive handbook to date from the perspective
of the investigator on the subject of bloodstain spatter analysis. 
The authors have provided the reader with an articulate and practical
guide to the interpretation of bloodstain patterns and crime scene analysis
reconstruction. This second edition text has become the basis for stan-
dardization of blood spatter analysis. Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an
Introduction to Crime Scene Reconstruction has heightened the need for
universal rules that deﬁne this discipline by stressing the underlying sci-
entiﬁc basis and how best to objectively apply this knowledge to cases in
the ﬁeld.
The text provides speciﬁc details on crime scene analysis and reconstruc-
tion in explaining the scientiﬁc methodology involved in the process. The
authors provide an excellent historical perspective to acquaint the reader with
the signiﬁcant chronology of the application of this technique. The authors
also provide excellent information on distinguishing crime scene analysis
from behavioral analysis and discuss the considerations involved in the recon-
struction of the crime. There is an entire chapter dedicated to the important
subject of proper terminology to be utilized in these analyses. Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis explains the complex mechanics of blood spatter analysis
with chapters that address the dynamics of reconstruction, such as determin-
ing motion and directionality, convergence and the point of origin, evaluating
impact spatter bloodstains, the characteristic patterns of blood which aid in
analysis and the proper documentation of blood stains and the reconstruc-
tion of a crime. The authors have included two chapters on software appli-
cations and demonstrative evidence for court presentation. Most signiﬁcant
in the Second Edition is the addition of over 100 photographs, which graph-
ically illustrate the dynamics of bloodstain patterns, practical applications,
case histories and excellent appendices.
The authors bring over 50 years of practical experience to this text. Tom
Bevel, my friend and colleague for many years, is a retired police Captain
from Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Bevel is the owner of TBI, a forensic edu-


--- PAGE 13 ---

xii
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
cation and consulting company. He is also an associate professor in the
Masters of Forensic Science program at the University of Central Oklahoma.
Captain Bevel (Ret.) holds a Master’s Degree in Criminal Justice and has
extensive training in the area of criminal investigation both in the United
States and Europe. Bevel has numerous professional afﬁliations and has acted
as a police consultant in over 41 different states and 8 foreign countries. He
has personally participated in over 3000 criminal investigations in which
bloodstain spatter evidence was the issue and has testiﬁed in numerous trials
as an expert witness. 
Ross Gardner served for The United States Army Criminal Investigation
Command (USACIDC) for over 24 years as a felony criminal investigator
and is now the Chief of Police for a small suburban Atlanta Police Depart-
ment. He holds a Master’s Degree in Computer and Information Resource
Management and has extensive training in the area of criminal investigation
through the United States Military. He served as an adjunct professor for
Central Texas College in the Police Science program. He is also certiﬁed as a
Senior Crime Scene Analyst with the International Association of Identiﬁca-
tion and has published as a recognized expert in the ﬁeld of bloodstain
pattern analysis. Special Agent (Ret.) Gardner, who is a consultant in crime
scene analysis, bloodstain pattern analysis, and crime scene investigation also
has numerous professional afﬁliations. Gardner has qualiﬁed as an expert in
bloodstain pattern analysis and crime scene reconstruction in both state and
federal courts.
In my textbook Practical Homicide Investigation: Tactics, Procedures, and
Forensic Techniques, Third Edition, I point out that, “Solving homicides, espe-
cially those without witnesses, is extremely more difﬁcult to solve because
your main witness, the deceased, is dead. One must develop the ability to
‘absorb’ the crime scene, and be able to read the uncollectible nuances of the
event.” The interpretation and analysis of bloodstain patterns within the
crime scene oftentimes provides the investigator with the critical information
to reconstruct the crime. Used properly, bloodstain pattern analysis can help
establish speciﬁc events associated with the crime.
I personally believe that without practical scene experience there is a
deﬁciency in crime scene reconstruction. Seasoned practice necessitates
that the practitioner have the ability to “absorb” the crime scene, and be
able to read the uncollectible nuances of the event. This is what we refer
to as “scene experience” as opposed to strict “laboratory” mentality. Tom
Bevel and Ross Gardner both have this “scene experience” as well as the
necessary knowledge to evaluate and apply the scientiﬁc methodology to
the reconstruction process. 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: With an Introduction to Crime Scene Recon-
struction, Second Edition is a masterful blend of practical scene knowledge


--- PAGE 14 ---

xiii
and the application of scientiﬁc methodology to the process of crime scene
reconstruction. It is organized in such a manner to allow the reader quick
and easy reference into speciﬁc areas of blood spatter. 
Vernon J. Geberth, M.S., M.P.S.
Series Editor


--- PAGE 15 ---



--- PAGE 16 ---

xv
Preface
The goal of forensics and crime scene reconstruction is simply to seek the
truth. The analyst has no other agenda. In pursuing this end, we revisit what
we hope is a not-too-distant past and attempt to recreate the events that
unfolded. The task is anything but simple and the tools employed are all of
the forensic disciplines.
Each area of forensics provides insight and a glimpse into this past. Each
has its place in evaluating the aftermath of crime — the physical evidence.
In the most classical sense, the majority of the forensic disciplines provide
information as to the “who” of crime. Fingerprints, serology, and trace and
ﬁber evidence allow the analyst to associate people or objects with a crime
scene. Forensic pathology, on the other hand, has always been the primary
link to the “what” of crime, providing insight to some of the events that
occurred during the incident.
Bloodstain pattern analysis is a discipline that has certainly reawakened
to its role in modern forensics as another method of illuminating the “what”
of crime. Used properly, it helps establish speciﬁc events associated with
violent crimes. In this capacity, bloodstain pattern analysis acts as a critical
bridge between classical forensics and crime scene reconstruction.
Although certainly not a young discipline, bloodstain pattern analysis is
just beginning to recognize some of the universal rules that deﬁne it. We still
see aggressive discussions between analysts over what they can or cannot
infer from a speciﬁc stain. More often than not these arguments consume
our objectivity, leading us to a darker side of forensics, where subjective
analysis reigns. To ﬁght this tendency, our continuing goal must be to under-
stand the discipline, its underlying scientiﬁc basis, and how best to objectively
apply this knowledge to cases in the ﬁeld. The investigator’s mission is to
always illuminate the truth, not shroud it in shadows.
The authors of this book come from two distinctly different backgrounds,
although both have a high level of experience in “on scene” crime scene
evaluation: one is a career civilian law enforcement ofﬁcer, and the other is
a retired Criminal Investigator for the U.S. Army. Both are nationally and
internationally respected in their ﬁelds. Two very different roads led them to
the same destination. Interestingly enough, those roads crossed outside the


--- PAGE 17 ---

xvi
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
city of London, at the Metropolitan Police Detective Training School. There
both authors, although several years apart, attended the Scenes of Crime
Ofﬁcer (SOCO) course.
The English approach to crime scenes, at the very least, is one of the
most methodical in the world. The SOCO course teaches students to under-
stand and incorporate all forensic evidence in the evaluation of a crime. It
places responsibility for understanding the interrelationship of that evidence
on none other than a generalist, the crime scene investigator.
Perhaps then it is the SOCO course that serves as the wellspring of the
authors’ shared passion and belief: conduct crime scene evaluations using a
holistic approach. Inherent in this thought is that case resolution is critically
dependent on proper crime scene analysis. However, case resolution is not
just a matter of proving someone guilty. The investigator seeks the truth, no
matter what it may be. This demands a consideration of all evidence available
and the correlation of such evidence in an attempt to identify reasons for
contradictory results when they happen to occur.
In the criminal justice system it is not uncommon to encounter a lawyer
who adamantly believes, no matter what the nature of the testimony, that
the investigator established in his or her own mind the innocence or guilt of
a subject before completing the crime scene evaluation. It appears incom-
prehensible to counsel that the investigator can take the often subjective
information reported and conduct an objective investigation. Such a reaction
should not surprise us, because the idea of objectivity is relatively foreign to
trial law. No matter what the underlying truth, lawyers (both the prosecution
and defense) highlight the information that best serves their positions and
attempt to diminish that which works against them.
The crime scene analyst, however, can ill afford to pursue his or her end
with the same mindset. Choosing what evidence one will or will not consider
in the analysis is heresy. Unfortunately, that trap is far too easy to fall into.
Within the scene lies the evidence, which, if properly analyzed, provides
everyone with an ability to deﬁne speciﬁc facts and certainly infer others.
Based on the totality of this information, it may well be possible to determine
the most probable events surrounding the situation. Even if one is unable to
deﬁne the overall event, proper analysis still allows for the elimination of
certain events, which alone adds clarity.
No single forensic discipline has the potential to provide as much clarity
regarding the occurrences at a crime scene as does bloodstain pattern analysis.
That cannot, however, lead to an expectation that the bloodstain evidence
will stand alone. In the right hands, however, bloodstain pattern analysis is
an extremely effective tool for deﬁning the truth.
Bloodstain pattern analysis is not for the casual investigator, who intends
only to graze the surface, ﬁnd a quick answer, and move on. The bloodstain


--- PAGE 18 ---

xvii
pattern analyst is truly one who reconstructs crime scenes. As such, he or
she must understand all the forensic disciplines. The analyst must be able to
objectively apply each category of evidence to the situation, inferring as little
as possible, but recognizing the whole. In this fashion, the evidence establishes
a knowledge base from which the analyst reaches the “truth.”
In part, the oath of ofﬁce for a U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Special
Agent states: “I shall at all times seek diligently to discover the truth, deterred
neither by fear nor prejudice…” We dedicate this book to the men and women,
analysts and investigators alike, who recognize and understand the impor-
tance of their roles as objective truth seekers.


--- PAGE 19 ---



--- PAGE 20 ---

xix
Editor’s Note
This textbook is part of a series entitled “Practical Aspects of Criminal and
Forensic Investigations.” This series was created by Vernon J. Geberth, New
York City Police Department Lieutenant Commander (Ret.), who is an
author, educator, and consultant on homicide and forensic investigations.
This series has been designed to provide contemporary, comprehensive,
and pragmatic information to the practitioner involved in criminal and
forensic investigations by authors who are nationally recognized experts in
their respective ﬁelds.


--- PAGE 21 ---



--- PAGE 22 ---

xxi
Acknowledgments
In considering a project of this nature, it is rarely the efforts of the authors
alone that ensure success. We would like to offer thanks and acknowledgment
to the following individuals for their support and efforts:
Rudi Jaehser of Frankfurt, Germany, for his untiring efforts in leading Ross
through the bowels of the Frankfurt University library those many late eve-
nings.
Regina Dearborn, for her expert translations of many of the articles discussed
in Chapter 2. Without her skill in German and her ability as a legal translator
many of these articles would have remained unknown.
Toby Wolson of Miami, Florida, for his support in providing excellent examples
of the roadmapping concept.
Sgt. Ron Wortham with the Oklahoma City Police Department, who designed
and constructed equipment used in bloodstain pattern research, the results
of which appear in this text.
Jouni Kiviranta of the Helsinki Police, whose outstanding photography skills
produced many of the enclosed ﬁgures.
Dr. Martin Fackler of Florida, for his support and critical eye. Dr. Fackler readily
shared his knowledge and research with us, providing important information
for Chapter 7.
Leonard Conn, formerly with the University of Oklahoma Police Department,
who assisted in building equipment for both the stop-motion photography
of blood impacting at various angles and the high-speed photographs of a
bullet impact into a bloody target. Examples of both are included in this book.
Vernon Geberth, who believed in our ability and helped bring the project to
fruition. Without his support the book would still be a dream.
Victoria Miller of Miller Forensic Computing, for her unselﬁsh loan of a full-
function copy of No More Strings III© for a separate project. Her help and
support ultimately led to the inclusion of many critical parts of Chapter 6.
Dr. Alfred Carter of Carleton University, Ottawa, for remaining patient and calm
in the face of Ross’ repetitive need for physics instruction and for his per-
mission to use images from the FCO software Backtrack Images®, TRACKS®,
and Backtrack/Win®. A special thanks goes out to Dr. Carter for no reason
other than no other single scientist or member of academia has given as much
to this discipline as he has.


--- PAGE 23 ---

xxii
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Dr. Kenneth Beard of Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, whose original research led
to our 5-year search to better understand droplet impacts. Much of our
understanding from Chapter 4 would not exist without Dr. Beard’s initial
assistance.
Don Coffey of the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command, for sharing his
approach and knowledge on dealing with pattern transfers.
John Anderson, Sheriff of El Paso County, Colorado, for his untiring support
and friendship. Whenever the project took a detour or seemed off track, John
would offer a word of encouragement or support. Finally, he reminded us
that nothing good is ever gained without some level of risk.
Dr. Ronald O. Gilcher, M.D., and Arlene Wilson with the Oklahoma Blood
Institute, who over many years have provided much information about
blood components and the processing involved in blood products provided
for research.
The members of the Metropolitan Police Forensic Crime Laboratory, London,
England, who allowed us to use still images from their outstanding video
“Blood in Slow Motion.”
To all the students from the basic bloodstain pattern schools conducted by Tom
and Ross. Their constant demand for more and more knowledge causes their
teachers to continue to grow within this discipline. The same is true of all of
the students of the Basic Crime Scene Reconstruction course. From each and
every class we have gained knowledge and learned new techniques.
Lt. Travis Witcher (Ret.) of the Oklahoma City Police Department, for securing
funding from outside sources that allowed Tom to attend training under
MacDonell and Bunker and at Hendon Police College in England. Lt. Witcher
required at the end of this training that Tom start his own research and
training to pass on the knowledge gained to OCPD ofﬁcers. We can all beneﬁt
from the insight in his comment, “Teaching will force you to really learn the
discipline.” His wisdom is more than evident and serves as a challenge for
each of us.
William Turner, formerly of the USACIDC, who sparked a ﬂame in Ross by
sharing the knowledge he gained from a Corning Institute bloodstain pattern
course. Bill probably has no idea of the events he set in motion, but we thank
him anyway.
The many instructors of the Scenes of Crime Ofﬁcer course, Metropolitan Police
Detective Training School, Hendon, England. Their insight and knowledge
are responsible in large part for forging Tom and Ross’ shared passion.
Three units of the Oklahoma City Police Department and their respective mem-
bers through the years: Technical Investigations, the Forensic Lab, and Homi-
cide. All of them helped focus this discipline and develop Tom’s “scene sense.”
Thank you for your never-ending support.
Scott Hector, whose computer and late night efforts helped create many of the
illustrations/ﬁgures used in the book.
The following agencies and individuals, for supplying various photographs in
support of the project: Henry Muse, E-Systems; Lt. William D. Gifford,
Anchorage Police Department; Donald R. Schuessler, Department of Public


--- PAGE 24 ---

xxiii
Safety, Eugene, Oregon; Tom J. Grifﬁn and Barie Goetz, Colorado Bureau of
Investigation; John Graham, Arvada Police Department, Colorado; Helena
Komuleinen, curator of the Finnish National Gallery; Lt. Johnny Kuhlman,
Oklahoma City Police Department; the Edmond Police Department, Okla-
homa; Doug Perkins, Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation; Ray Clark,
Oklahoma City Police Department; Heikke Majamma, National Bureau of
Investigation, Helsinki, Finland; Peter Barnett; Dr. Daniel Davis; The Journal
of Forensic Identiﬁcation; Mark Nelson, Springdale Police Department, Arkan-
sas; T. Daniel Gilliam, Larimer County Sheriff’s Department, Fort Collins,
Colorado; David Stiles, Texarkana Police Department, Arkansas; Louis Laurel,
State of Texas Attorney General’s Ofﬁce; Don Blake and Bill May, Norman
Police Department, Oklahoma; Mike McGuffey, Covington Police Depart-
ment, Kentucky; Claire Dawnson-Brown, Travis County District Attorney’s
Ofﬁce, Texas; Iris Dalley, OSBI, Oklahoma City, OK; Steve Chancellor,
USACIDC; Sandra M. Roberts, Eugene Police Department, Oregon; David
Stiles, Texarkana, Arkansas.
The International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, the Rocky Moun-
tain Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, and the Association for
Crime Scene Reconstruction, for establishing an environment in which we
can all grow.
There are many more individuals who may not be named here. All have
contributed to this discipline in some fashion, which in turn assisted in the
writing of this book. We salute them for their individual efforts, insight, and
resulting research in support of bloodstain pattern analysis and crime scene
reconstruction.


--- PAGE 25 ---



--- PAGE 26 ---

xxv
The Authors
Captain Tom Bevel (Ret.) is the owner of TBI, a forensic education and
consulting company. He is also an associate professor in the Masters of
Forensic Science program at the University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond,
Oklahoma. He retired after 27 years with the Oklahoma City Police Depart-
ment. His last assignment was the Commander of the Homicide, Robbery,
Missing Persons, and the Unsolved Homicide units.
Captain Bevel holds a Master of Arts degree in Administration of Crim-
inal Justice from the University of Central Oklahoma. He is a graduate of the
Scenes of Crime Ofﬁcer course, Hendon, England; the Technical Investiga-
tions course, Central U.S. Police Institute, Oklahoma State University at
Oklahoma City; the FBI National Academy; and the Post-Graduate Medical-
Legal course, London Medical College, London, England.
Captain Bevel is a Fellow of the Association for Crime Scene Recon-
struction (ACSR) and the American College of Forensic Analysts; a Distin-
guished Member of the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts (IABPA); a Regional Representative for the International Associ-
ation for Identiﬁcation (IAI); a member of the Editorial Board for the
Journal of Forensic Identiﬁcation; and a member of the Southwestern Asso-
ciation of Forensic Scientists (SWAFS) and the American Academy of
Forensic Sciences (AAFS).
Captain Bevel has served as a crime scene consultant in more than 41
U.S. states and 8 foreign countries. He has been qualiﬁed as an expert in
crime scene reconstruction and bloodstain pattern analysis in both state and
federal courts.
Special Agent Ross M. Gardner (Ret.) worked for the U.S. Army Criminal
Investigation Command (USACIDC) as a felony criminal investigator for more
than 20 years. He retired as a Command Sergeant Major and Special Agent in
1999 after serving in U.S. Army law enforcement for more than 24 years and
is now the Chief of Police of a small suburban Atlanta police department.
Special Agent Gardner holds a Master’s degree in Computer and Infor-
mation Systems Management from Webster University, a Bachelor’s degree
in Criminal Justice from Wayland Baptist University, and an Associate’s


--- PAGE 27 ---

xxvi
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
degree in Police Science from Central Texas College. He graduated ﬁrst in
his class at the Scenes of Crime Ofﬁcer course, New Scotland Yard, Hendon,
England. From 1988 to 1996 he served as an adjunct professor of the police
science program at Central Texas College. He is a former President of the
Rocky Mountain Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts (RMABPA) as
well as the Association for Crime Scene Reconstruction (ACSR) and served
as the Chairman of the Education Committee for both the RMABPA and the
International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts (IABPA).
Special Agent Gardner is certiﬁed by the International Association for
Identiﬁcation (IAI) as a Senior Crime Scene Analyst, a rating he has held for
10 years. He is an active instructor and consultant throughout the United
States in crime scene analysis, bloodstain pattern analysis, and crime scene
investigation, teaching to a variety of groups, from police and investigative
organizations to trial counsel professional development groups. Special Agent
Gardner has qualiﬁed as an expert in bloodstain pattern analysis and crime
scene reconstruction in both state and federal courts.


--- PAGE 28 ---

1
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: 
Its Function and a 
Historical Perspective
And Cain quarreled with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they
were in the ﬁeld, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.
And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel, thy brother? And he said,
I know not: Am I my brother’s keeper?
And the Lord said, What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother’s
blood crieth unto me from the ground. And now art thou cursed from the
earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from
thy hand. When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto
thee her strength; and a vagabond shalt thou be on the earth.1
Genesis 4:10
Reading these passages one might wonder, was God really unaware of what
transpired between Cain and Abel? Was He then convinced of the crime only
by the presence of Abel’s blood? This seems unlikely, given the nature of the
Judeo-Christian God. Rather, it would appear that God was reminding Cain
that no matter what Cain’s denial, the physical evidence of the deed spoke
in as strong, if not a more convincing, voice. In these few short paragraphs,
we ﬁnd the historical basis and very likely the ﬁrst usage of bloodstain pattern
analysis in a judicial setting.
The Function of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
What is the function of bloodstain pattern analysis? Like any forensic science
or discipline, bloodstain pattern analysis seeks to deﬁne the facts surrounding
some incident that is in question. The examination of the physical nature of
1


--- PAGE 29 ---

2
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
bloodstains provides information speciﬁc to the events that occurred during
the incident.
We often refer to what the analyst evaluates as the “static aftermath” of
an event.2 Dispersion, shape characteristics, volume, pattern, the number of
bloodstains, and their relationship to the surrounding scene are part of this
aftermath. This information provides the investigator with a window to the
past. Clarity is not a guarantee, for it is possible the information present in
the bloodstains will fail to illuminate any of the issues in question. Often,
however, the analyst ﬁnds direct and convincing information that makes the
role of the fact ﬁnder much easier.
The information we are likely to discover through an examination of the
bloodstains includes:
•
The direction a given droplet was traveling at the time of impact
•
The angle of impact
•
The probable distance from the target from which the droplet origi-
nated
•
The nature of the force involved in the bloodshed and the direction
from which that force was applied
•
The nature of any object used in applying the force
•
The approximate number of blows struck during an incident
•
The relative position in the scene of the suspect, victim, or other
related objects during the incident
•
Sequencing of multiple events associated with an incident
•
In some instances, which hand delivered the blows from a beating
The Relationship of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
to Crime Scene Reconstruction
Crime scene reconstruction demands that we evaluate all physical and testi-
monial evidence to derive some conclusion as to what occurred. As Geberth
reminds us, for homicide investigations, case resolution hinges on “careful
and intelligent [italics added] examination of the scene.”3 Much as does the
reporter, the investigator attempts to deﬁne the who, what, when, where,
how, and why of a crime to assist in reconstructing the events. There is an
unfortunate problem associated with this process: there is no standard by
which we can test our ultimate conclusions. An archaeologist once made an
analogy about this difﬁculty. Discussing a dig and the conclusions drawn
from it, he said, “It’s something like putting together a jigsaw puzzle without
having access to the boxtop. You really don’t know what the picture is sup-
posed to look like.”4 The investigator’s box top is not available either. Despite


--- PAGE 30 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective
3
this limitation, crime scene analysis and crime scene reconstruction attempt
to deﬁne the nature of actions that are so dynamic that even if we had a
videotape of the incident, they might not be fully understood.
In their most classic use, the majority of forensic disciplines provide the
investigator with information regarding the “who” of the crime. Blood typ-
ing, DNA evaluations, ﬁngerprint evidence, and hair examinations help us
decide who was or was not present at the scene. In this concept of “who,” we
also include areas such as forensic chemistry, biology, geology, and trace
evidence examinations, because they help associate items to our player and
to the scene. This, too, ultimately serves the function of deﬁning the “who”
of the reconstruction.
Our answers to “what,” the actions that occurred during the crime, are
sought most often through the application of forensic pathology. As Dr.
James Luke stated: “From the standpoint of forensic pathology, the two
major parameters that form the basis of any case investigation are (1) iden-
tiﬁcation and documentation of the postmortem ﬁndings present, and (2)
interpretation of those ﬁndings in the context of the circumstances  [italics
added] of death.” 5
In the past two decades, bloodstain pattern analysis has reawakened to
its role in documenting these circumstances. Bloodstain analysis brings to
the investigation the ability to deﬁne those events that could or could not
have occurred during the course of bloodshed. Once identiﬁed, these facts
are considered in light of all other evidence as a means of corroborating or
refuting statements, confessions, or investigative theories.
Thus bloodstain pattern analysis mirrors in many ways the role of foren-
sic pathology. Once again quoting Dr. Luke, “It is the responsibility of the
forensic pathologist ﬁnally to construct a scaffolding of factual information
against which witnesses’ and suspects’ statements can be evaluated.”6 Blood-
stain evidence in this role (acting as a scaffolding or part of the lattice) cannot
stand apart from other evidence.7 Reconstruction demands that we consider
all evidence. Viewed from a holistic approach, all the evidence available
should lead those who view it to a preferably similar conclusion.
This concept of a generally agreed-upon conclusion should not be a
foreign thought, particularly when considering bloodstain patterns. They
are, after all, graphically oriented. For example, in describing a pattern
transfer as “consistent with” something, any analyst should be able to point
to some physical characteristic of the stain and then to the correlating item
that created it. The analyst should then be able to create some generalized
reproduction of the pattern using the item. If this is done, another analyst
cannot simply ignore this information. Granted, we may discover a second-
ary method of creation, but this simply adds a responsibility to discover
which is the more likely event. If a stain is observable and reproducible, it


--- PAGE 31 ---

4
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
is difﬁcult for two analysts to rationally argue their beliefs from mutually
exclusive positions. When this occurs it is very likely the result of subjective
analysis on the part of one or both. Unfortunately, subjective analysis is a
fact of life. To help preclude subjectivity, the analyst should attempt to
achieve several things.
First, the analyst must understand all areas of forensic science and must
have been directly exposed to crime scenes. Tom Grifﬁn of the Colorado
Bureau of Investigation often remarks that analysts need a “scene sense.” This
sense gives the analyst a more rounded perception, taking into consideration
the many subtleties and interrelationships found at scenes. Evidence viewed
from the conﬁnes of a white-walled laboratory is far too sterile. It leaves the
viewer lacking a realistic perspective of crimes and crime scenes. It is this
perspective that makes up “scene sense.” As the SOCO course at the Hendon
Detective Training School teaches, we gain much from viewing evidence in
situ. This is true not only from a case perspective, but also for the long-term
development of the investigator.
Do not construe the necessity for understanding these disciplines as
meaning the analyst is an expert in all of them. Far from it — crime scene
analysts are generalists. They have, much as does a manager, the knowledge
to take the experience and expertise of the other team members and put them
all together. This process is at the heart of crime scene reconstruction. As we
will constantly remind the reader, it is not enough that the analyst can
reconstruct the bloodstain evidence. A reconstruction that fails to consider
all known evidence is no reconstruction at all.
Second, analysts must understand their discipline. Bloodstain pattern
analysis is far from being a static ﬁeld. Our understanding changes every day
due to research and experimentation. As we base bloodstain pattern analysis
on the application of physical laws to blood, there are certain universal rules
we can apply. These rules are as true today as they were when ﬁrst observed.
Understanding these universal applications, and then seeking those areas that
require further study, should be the lifetime goal of every analyst.
Historical Perspective of Bloodstain Pattern Evidence
In seeking an understanding of bloodstain pattern analysis, it is important
to look at its evolution. In his 1992 book, Blood Evidence, Craig Lewis wrote:
“The science of bloodstain pattern analysis, a ﬁeld in which the only textbook
in existence was written by MacDonell, was little known.”8 This viewpoint,
although inaccurate, is not uncommon. Out of ignorance, authors, judges,
and investigators continue to proclaim the discipline as something “new.”


--- PAGE 32 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective
5
To those who spend time at scenes of violent crime, it seems unimagin-
able to ignore the presence of blood or not to ask some simple questions as
to its relationship to the crime. Bloodstain pattern analysis, as we will see, is
anything but new. It is only in the last several years that we have discovered
some of the more important historical documents relating to bloodstain
pattern analysis. The existence of these documents alters the somewhat biased
view held by our investigative predecessors.
The mere presence of blood, excluding any formal analysis, has long
been held as evidence of foul play. For example, in the development of early
Germanic law, tribal code (private, as compared to state) was often created.
One of the surviving documents of this nature is the Sachsenspeigel, com-
piled as a record of Saxon custom. A knight named Ritter Repkow wrote
the document during the period 1220–1235. Common Law II, 63, Article
1-3 dealt in part with the raising of the “hue and cry” and the necessity of
proving one’s innocence for acting against a criminal caught in the act. He
who had acted was required to prove an incontestability of the criminal’s
deed.9 Examples of this proof, although not quite beyond a reasonable doubt
included “a criminal caught red handed.”10 The Sachsenspeigel, with its
detailed illustrations, makes reference to the criminal having been caught
with blood on his hand.
The work of William Shakespeare, although not the typical reference
material of the criminalist, is ﬁlled with references to blood and the preju-
dicial nature with which its discovery is viewed. Shakespeare’s various works,
written between 1582 and 1616, like those of any author, reﬂect the percep-
tions of his time. For example, in Act II, Scene II of Macbeth, after stabbing
King Duncan, Macbeth says:
What hands are here! Ha! they pluck out mine eyes. Will all great Neptune’s
ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand?11
Although of little concern to modern bloodstain analysis, the Sach-
senspeigel and Shakespeare’s plays do reﬂect the consideration of bloodstains
as a basic issue, preceding the formal development of forensic science. They
also reﬂect the prejudicial manner in which bloodstains are often viewed. An
interesting artistic example of the prejudicial nature of bloodstains hangs in
the Central Art Archives of Finland. The work is entitled Fratricide, by Akseli
Gellen-Kallela (circa 1897). It shows a young man with a bloodied sword and
clothing as his mother points to numerous stains on his clothing (Figure 1.1).
Another author whose writings reﬂect man’s inquisitive nature with
blood evidence is Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In 1887 Doyle wrote A Study in
Scarlet, introducing the world to his brilliant character Sherlock Holmes. In


--- PAGE 33 ---

6
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
this story, the master of deduction concerns himself not only with discovering
a reliable reagent test for blood, but also within the examination of “gouts
and splashes of blood, which lay all around.”12 Again, we see artistic indica-
tions that those concerned with the early investigation of crime considered
the relationship of bloodstains to such crime.
Early Scientiﬁc References
Having considered several literary references, it seems appropriate to turn
our attention to the scientiﬁc evaluation of bloodstain patterns. We intend
to discuss some of the more critical and insightful research conducted over
the last century; however, there are many references that may not be men-
tioned or discussed in detail. The analyst should recognize this and consider
seeking these historical references for greater enlightenment.
Figure 1.1 Fratricide by Akseli Gellen-Kallela (1897), a painting owned by the
Anteneum, the Antell Collection, and the Central Art Archives of Finland,
photographed by Hannu Aaltonen. Beyond the issue of his bloody sword, the
pattern transfer and blood spots on the young man’s garments speak his guilt to
his mother. (Photo courtesy of National Art Archives, Helsinki, Finland.)


--- PAGE 34 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective
7
In Germany and Austria, the universities at Kiel and Vienna appear to
have been academic hotbeds of activity in bloodstain pattern analysis. Two
signiﬁcant authors of the time were Eduard Piotrowski and Ernst Ziemke,
followed soon after by Dr. Balthazard of France.
The primary periodical in which many of the continental authors
expressed themselves was the Vierteljahresschrift für gerichtliche und offentli-
che Medizin (Quarter-Year Writings for Forensic Medicine), published in Ger-
many. Although much of the concern between 1850 and 1940 dealt with the
identiﬁcation of blood, scattered throughout these discussions are references
to patterns observed at scenes.
Before proceeding, it is important to note that in German the term
Blutspritzen was widely used by various authors. This term is translated most
often as “blood sprinkles.”13 There is, however, no absolute translation and
the terms sprinkle, spatter, splash, or spurt are all acceptable usage.14 It
becomes difﬁcult, then, to always understand the speciﬁc context intended
by any author. A caution is in order when considering the translations
offered here.
In 1856, J. B. Lassaigne wrote “Neue Untersuchungen zur Erkennung
von Blutﬂecken auf Eisen und Stahl” (New Examination to Differentiate
Bloodspots from Iron and Steel). In the latter section of his paper, Las-
saigne discusses marks that appeared similar to bloodstains but were
caused by insects.15
Although Lassaigne made it clear he believed “crushing” of dead ﬂies
created such stains, he implied that he found such stains at scenes and
associated their presence with the presence of ﬂies. Based on the description,
these stains seem similar to what we might refer to today as “ﬂy specks.”
Unfortunately, the translation and overall description of Lassaigne cannot
satisfy the issue. Had Lassaigne found “ﬂy specks”? Was he then establishing
a causal connection without considering the regurgitation of blood by ﬂies
at bloodstained scenes? Whatever the case, Lassaigne’s observations establish
his attention to detail and concern for differentiating such stains from
normal bloodstains.
In 1863, John and Theodric Beck wrote “Elements of Medical Jurispru-
dence.” The article, as reviewed by Herbert MacDonell, discussed various
cases in which bloodstain pattern analysis was utilized. Speciﬁc references
were made to the “situation” of wounds, and as MacDonell noted, the authors
also used the term “blood sprinkles.” The latter term tends to indicate a
German inﬂuence, although the article originated in Philadelphia.16
In 1880, Dr. Henry Faulds published “On Skin-Furrows of the Hand,”
describing bloody ﬁngerprints and their likely use to identify the criminal.17
In 1882, Professor Charles M. Tidy of London published “Legal Medi-
cine,” in which he stated:


--- PAGE 35 ---

8
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Few things hold so important a place as, or involve investigations of a greater
nicety, than determining the precise nature of various [blood] spots or stains
found on fabrics, instruments…”18
Perhaps one of the most impressive treatises written on the subject of
bloodstain pattern analysis is Ueber Entstehung, Form, Richtung und Ausbre-
itung der Blutspuren nach Hiebwunden des Kopfes (Concerning Origin, Shape,
Direction, and Distribution of Bloodstains Following Blow Injuries to the Head),
written by Eduard Piotrowski of the University of Vienna in 1895.
Dr. Piotrowski’s application of science to his observations and evalua-
tions of bloodstains is unequaled in the known writings of the time. He
reconstructed his scenes to model those in question, controlled and adjusted
various variables to determine their speciﬁc effect on his experiments, and
used live rabbits as victims! Although the latter issue would not sit well with
many modern groups, Dr. Piotrowski recognized the dynamic nature of what
he was studying.
Dr. Piotrowski considered this dynamic nature and used it as one of his
variables. Calling the concept a “complicertern morde,” he used multiple meth-
ods of attack against his study subjects (rabbits), thereby ensuring himself
that he was considering all possibilities and their effects.19
In considering this complicertern morde, Dr. Piotrowski properly recog-
nized the bodily reactions of his subjects when struck. In the following
example he observed small stains “similar to dots” that radiated out from the
rabbit’s head, and he concluded:
As far as their position is concerned, they spread out in a radiating pattern.
The center of this outward radiating droplet [pattern] was the nostrils
and mouth from which the accumulated blood was forced out… [expi-
ratory blood].20
Evident to Piotrowski was the correlation between the location of the
stain’s tail and the direction the droplet was traveling at impact. He also
recognized the causative factors of cast-off stains. He included in his evalu-
ation of the ﬁrst the effect of a parabolic arc on the resulting stain. In the
latter, he isolated not only the fact that blood ﬂung from a weapon would
create a speciﬁc stain, but also correlated this with stain directionality, giving
him an ability to deﬁne the direction in which the weapon was being moved.21
In this work’s concluding statement, Dr. Piotrowski commented: “… the
formation, shape, and distribution of bloodstains follow speciﬁc rules and
that these, allowing for many modiﬁcations considering the nature of the
case, are not to be underestimated and are of great value in the judgment.”22
In 1901 Jürgen Thorwald, writing to describe the efforts of Professor A.
Florence, stated:


--- PAGE 36 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective
9
[Florence] had worked out a whole system for classifying bloodstains caused
by dripping, splashing, spurting, or grazing contact. Round stains, or
roundish jagged stains, for example, indicate that blood fell vertically;
oblong stains result from impact at various angles.23
Thorwald based his discussion on Florence’s article “Les Taches de Sang au
Laboratoire de Medicine Legale de Lyon.” This article originally appeared in
the Archives de Anthropolgie Criminelle in 1901.
In 1904, Hans Gross wrote Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System
der Kriminalistik, in which he provided a detailed discussion of not only the
evaluation of bloodstains, but also their collection and documentation.24
Gross felt bloodstains were of critical importance in the investigation and
thus devoted some 30 pages of the book to his considerations of blood and
bloodstain patterns in the investigative process.
In 1914, Haberda wrote “Eine besondere Form von Blutspritzen” (A
Special Form of Bloodstain), discussing a speciﬁc pattern observed in airway
injuries. He described such stains as droplets of various shapes that contained
small air bubbles mixed with the blood. Beyond his consideration for this
particular stain, Haberda offers many insightful lessons that are still appli-
cable. Consider the following:
The discovery of quantity, spread, form, and arrangement of bloodstains at
a blood spattered crime scene can be of high importance. Evaluation
requires many years of experience, usually learned little by little through
practice, but never from books. Never the less, experts are often not careful
enough when it comes to the necessary evaluation.
Forced by precise questions of police, jurisdictional or governmental
authorities, the experts sometimes answer too exclusively and draw the
wrong conclusions about the bloodstains on a corpse or in the surrounding
crime scene.25
We would agree wholeheartedly that oftentimes analysts make conclusions
that are far too exclusive.
Haberda also made reference to bloody ﬁngerprints, clothing pattern
impressions, and his particular stain — the “foamy bloodstain.” In describing
the shapes of stains that might be encountered, Haberda wrote:
Even though the distance of the fall, or the angle with which the blood hits
the ground inﬂuences the shape of bloodstains, which are for example more
or less round, bear paw like, club or bottle like…26
How similar to modern descriptions are Haberda’s? Round and bear paw
are still adjectives used to describe stains, whereas elliptical has replaced terms


--- PAGE 37 ---

10
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
such as club or bottle-like. There can be little doubt Haberda was observing
and classifying the very characteristics we still look for today.
Ernest Ziemke is another author of interest. His work is found in
Gerichtsärztliche und polizeiärtzliche Technik, a book edited by Theodor
Lochte in 1914. Chapter 7, entitled “Die Untersuchung von Blutspuren” (The
Examination of Blood Tracks), was written by Dr. Ziemke and includes 14
pages of text with numerous pictures; it details various stains and the infor-
mation represented by those stains. Ziemke dealt with a wide range of issues
affecting bloodstain pattern analysis.
In the chapter preamble, Dr. Ziemke states:
Blood tracks [effects or evidence] are the most important tracks that stay
behind after a crime is committed. Very often they alone have been of
signiﬁcant enough importance for the conviction of the suspect, and have
been the focal point in a trial with only circumstantial evidence. … Their
evaluation should be efﬁcient, because during an investigation it may be
hard to foresee what might be of importance later during a court trial.27
In discussing the search for blood, for both serological and bloodstain
pattern evidence, Dr. Ziemke offers that:
The suspect, his clothes, all items he carries, or which are in his pockets
should be carefully examined for bloodstains.28
This is sound advice that some of the best bloodstain pattern analysts in
the country continually stress and teach today. Far too often such minute
traces are simply overlooked by investigators.
In discussing pattern analysis and the conclusion drawn, Dr. Ziemke
comments:
Very important conclusions can be drawn from the arrangement, location,
size, and form of bloodstains. … Based on our own experience and exper-
iments we want to point out that it is necessary to be cautious and not draw
conclusions from a single or very few blood tracks. This happens quite
often. … Only when a large number of bloodstains are examined and com-
pared, is it possible to exclude errors [in logic].29
Dr. Ziemke provided detailed descriptions of various types of blood-
stains. His terminology followed that of Piotrowski, but he added terms such
as “thorn apple shaped” to refer to the bear claw stain. He acknowledged that
secondary droplets (wave cast-off stains) in these instances would indicate
the direction of motion of the blood droplet. He included ﬁgure examples
of cast-off blood and drip patterns in which he described how to deﬁne


--- PAGE 38 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective 11
directionality. Figure 1.2 is an example of one of these illustrations. In closing
his discussion of bloodstain patterns, he stated:
When the examination of bloodstains is done efﬁciently and carefully, and
if all possibilities are exhausted, shape, location, and the site of the blood-
stain can give important details about the circumstances of the deed, even-
tually even be of importance for the conviction of the suspect.30
Dr. W. F. Hesselink, writing in 1931, considered various issues related
to bloodstain analysis in his article “Blutspuren in der kriminalistischen
Praxis.” For example, Hesselink considered the subsequent condition of the
dried stains on clothing as a manner of differentiating whether such clothing
had been worn or in use since the deposit of the stains. He also considered
a method of dissolving the bloodstain to determine its relative age when
compared to some other stain. Hesselink eventually concluded this tech-
nique was inaccurate, indicating that the manner in which each droplet
dried and coagulated would affect the results. He also considered whether
a suspect would or would not be stained in a violent murder, making the
following observations:
The answer depends upon two main circumstances: one, if many blood-
stains are found at the scene, and two, what instrument was used. Regard-
ing this I did several experiments. When using the hammer, the liquid
squirts in all four directions, and will also cover the suspect. If a stick is
Figure 1.2 Illustrations from Dr. Ziemke’s chapter (see Ref. 27) on bloodstain
patterns that relate to deﬁning directionality of the stain. The two ﬁgures
(Ziemke’s Figures 42 and 43) demonstrate a drip effect from walking and running.
Ziemke added the arrows to show the directionality evident in the stains.


--- PAGE 39 ---

12
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
used, the blood squirts left and right, and the suspect might not show any
blood marks. When a forward bent ﬁle is used, the blood squirts only to
the front. The foreground [of an illustration] shows many spatter while
only a few went towards the subject. While the suspect of a bloody murder,
performed with a hammer, usually will be bloodstained, the suspect, in
case of death caused by hitting with a bent ﬁle might have few or no
bloodstains on the clothes.31
Hesselink then described the use of a pattern transfer he discovered,
stating:
In one murder, I found a blood spot on the bedroom ﬂoor. First, it did not
look too informative, but when I examined it later with a very strong light,
I found remarkable prints of about 14 shoe nails.32
Hesselink sought to deﬁne not only the nature of the stains found, but
also the manner of the event creating the stains. He then correlated the
information with other forensic evidence, resulting in a partial reconstruc-
tion of his scene and the crime. His recognition of the importance of blood-
stain pattern analysis for this purpose is reﬂected in his closing statement:
Therefore, when examining blood, the blood investigation [to identify a
substance as blood] itself is not as important as the clariﬁcation of sur-
rounding circumstances.33
In 1931, Henry T. F. Rhodes, a criminologist in England, member of the
International Academy of Criminology, and an admirer of the great crimi-
nologist Edmund Locard, published Some Persons Unknown. The book was
a compilation of case studies with a history of the scientiﬁc development of
criminology. Although Rhodes did not discuss the use of bloodstain patterns
in and of itself, he discussed in depth the development of the identiﬁcation
of blood in forensic investigation. He commented on the ever-increasing
discrimination required by the court in terms of making identiﬁcation of
blood. Rhodes stated this manifested itself in the change of accepted testi-
mony from “it looks like blood,” to “yes, it is blood,” to “yes, it is blood and
it is human.” At the time of publication the four categories of blood, which
ultimately became known as the ABH/ABO grouping system, had just been
discovered. Rhodes recognized this advancement as a signiﬁcant investigative
tool with which to primarily exclude individuals as suspects.34
Rhodes followed his ﬁrst book with a second entitled Clues and Crime.
Published in 1933, the theme of the book was consideration of how science
assisted in the detection of crime. Rhodes did not comment himself on


--- PAGE 40 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective 13
bloodstain patterns but gave speciﬁc mention to the efforts of Hans Gross
in bloodstain pattern analysis.35
In their writings it is obvious that Hesselink and Rhodes clearly viewed
blood from different perspectives. Rhodes understood what Gross was pur-
suing in the area of bloodstain patterns, but he felt the scientiﬁc individual-
ization through the blood grouping systems of the time was of greater
signiﬁcance. Hesselink, on the other hand, felt the individualization and
identiﬁcation was secondary and that the patterns themselves were of greater
signiﬁcance. Today we recognize that both were correct. The individualiza-
tion of blood stains without consideration of the pattern itself or vice versa
is tantamount to reading a book but skipping chapters.
In 1939, at the XXII Congress of Forensic Medicine, one of the most
insightful papers relating to bloodstain pattern analysis was presented by Dr.
Victor Balthazard, R. Piedelievre, Henri Desolille, and L. Derobert. Entitled
“Etude des Gouttes de Sang Projecte,” the proposed purpose of the research
was to pinpoint characteristic elements of a bloodstain which might “give
decisive hints” as to its origin.36
Balthazard et al. felt it necessary not only to examine the resulting spatter
and stains, but also to understand the manner in which blood exits wounds,
the trajectories of such blood, and the manner in which the blood droplet
changed to become the resulting stain. Like Piotrowski, Balthazard recog-
nized the importance of the dynamics involved in bloodshed and realized
bloodshed could not always be mimicked under laboratory conditions. To
provide more realistic data, Balthazard utilized rabbits to produce actual
bleeding injuries.37
Balthazard’s consideration of the length-to-width ratio of a stain as a
function of impact angle is one of the most important contributions of his
work. Analysts repeat his experiment in nearly every 40-hour bloodstain
pattern analysis course taught today. In considering impact angle estimations,
however, Professor Balthazard cautioned:
In practical application, it [impact angle evaluations] should not be
looked after for an illusionary accuracy. Nevertheless, this curve permits
an estimate of the impact angle with an acceptable accuracy, sufﬁcient for
practical purposes.38
Another important consideration was determining the point of origin.
Balthazard furthered the cause and process for making such estimations.
His group’s efforts established the basis for current “stringing” techniques.
Yet, in considering the issue of the unknown parabola of the droplet, Balt-
hazard stated:


--- PAGE 41 ---

14
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Practically these methods can only be applied in a limited manner. [For
instance] sometimes it is necessary to ﬁnd out whether a victim, at the
moment he was injured, stood on his feet or was lying.39
Finally, Balthazard’s group considered the nature of the target on which
a droplet fell. They found that many deformations would be possible, given
various target characteristics. In summary, Balthazard stated:
These modiﬁcations [deformations caused by the target] are sometimes
obvious, but we must constantly remember that on an apparently homo-
geneous target, uneven areas can occur which may cause slight disﬁgu-
rations.40
It is likely that world events in Europe prevented further signiﬁcant
development of Balthazard’s research. Nevertheless, his group’s efforts were
not completely lost. In 1941, John Gohringer, a U.S. citizen studying for
his medical degree at the Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of
Heidelberg, wrote as his inaugural dissertation, “Kann aus dem Bild auf
verschiedenen Unterlagagen die Fallohe und Richtung des gefallenen
Tropfens Ermittelt Werden?” (Is It Possible to Establish the Falling Height
and Directionality of a Dropped Down Drop of Blood from the Appearance
of the Stain on Various Targets?). Much of Dr. Gohringer’s inspiration
developed from Balthazard’s research. An interesting historical note: Dr.
Gohringer completed his studies in December 1941 and was subsequently
held as an internee by the German government for 7 months before he was
released to Vienna. He later returned to the U.S., where he practiced med-
icine. In 1992, Dr. Gohringer spoke before the International Association of
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts (IABPA) Training Conference in Colorado
Springs, and shared some of his thoughts on the history of bloodstain
pattern analysis.41
Dr. Paul Leland Kirk, of Berkeley, California, also added immeasurably
to the knowledge of bloodstain pattern analysis. Dr. Kirk, a Professor of
Criminalistics and Biochemistry, was active in assisting law enforcement
organizations in the U.S. from 1935 to 1967. Kirk’s book, Crime Investigation,
published in 1953, included a chapter entitled “Blood: Physical Investigation,”
in which he discussed the application of bloodstain pattern analysis to crim-
inal investigations.42
Another source for Kirk’s beliefs on the subject is his afﬁdavit ﬁled in
the Court of Common Pleas, Criminal Branch, in the case of the Ohio v.
Samuel H. Sheppard.43 This document provides immense insight to his
approach to bloodstain analysis.
In the Sheppard case, Dr. Kirk considered the drying times of blood and
the evaluation of blood trails as evidence. He speciﬁcally sought to evaluate


--- PAGE 42 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective 15
plausible causes for such trails. Further, he identiﬁed a void in the bedroom
of Mrs. Sheppard that others missed, which established the most likely posi-
tion of the attacker. He then correlated the cast-off patterns found in the
room to the position of this void. Dr. Kirk clearly utilized a whole-scene
approach.*
In 1960, Dr. Jozef Radziki of Warsaw, Poland, published “Slady Krwi w
Praktyce Sledczej” (Bloodstain Prints in the Practice of Technology).
Although a full translation is not yet available, MacDonell had portions
translated for inclusion in the IABPA library. In this work, Dr. Radziki estab-
lished three basic groups of bloodstains, based on their mechanisms of cre-
ation. They are:
1.
Bloodstains resulting directly from extravasation — drops, gushes,
and pools of blood
2.
Bloodstains resulting from the application of various instruments —
spatter, cast-offs, and patterns resulting from direct contact
3.
Bloodstains resulting from the wiping or removal of blood
As with previous authors, Dr. Radziki cautioned that a critical consider-
ation were the characteristics of the target surface, because blood stains
created under similar circumstances but falling to different targets might well
result in dissimilar stains. Another interesting point made by Dr. Radziki
included his assertion that “how” an instrument was employed would clearly
affect the nature and distribution of the resulting spatter. Dr. Radziki also
discussed arterial bloodstain patterns in depth.4
Modern Works in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Having dealt with a “historical” view of bloodstain pattern analysis, we arrive
at a more recent history. Following Dr. Kirk’s efforts throughout the 1960s
was what might be considered the modern renaissance of the discipline. The
number of authors writing on this subject increased dramatically, profes-
sional associations related to the ﬁeld were established, and the discipline as
a whole took on a far more accepted status in court.
Many proclaim Herbert MacDonell as the father of modern bloodstain
pattern analysis. Whether this is accurate depends on your individual per-
spective. What cannot be denied is that Herbert MacDonell brought about
a distinct reawakening of this discipline.
* We must make one point when considering this document. Whereas Dr. Kirk’s knowledge
and consideration of bloodstain analysis are unquestionable, we feel his reconstruction in
the Sam Sheppard case is difﬁcult to defend. He managed to interweave extremely subjec-
tive information into his opinion of what was or was not a fact.


--- PAGE 43 ---

16
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
In 1970, after conducting extensive research, MacDonell and Lorraine
Bialousz coauthored Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human Blood.
Because the two were working under a Law Enforcement Assistance Admin-
istration (LEAA) grant, the LEAA published the report. The LEAA document
remained available for nearly 12 years before going out of print. In 1982, the
revised paper was released as Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation. MacDonell
subsequently completed a third work on the subject in 1993, entitled Blood-
stain Patterns.
In 1983, Dr. Henry Lee, Peter Deforest, and Dr. R. E. Gaensslen wrote
Forensic Science: An Introduction to Criminalistics.45 Included in this work is
a 12-page section dedicated to explaining bloodstain patterns.
In 1983, the IABPA was formed. The association’s stated purpose is to
promote the general knowledge, techniques, and understanding of bloodstain
pattern evidence.*
In 1986, the Journal of Forensic Sciences published two papers by Peter
Pizzola, Steven Roth, and Peter Deforest, entitled “Blood Droplet
Dynamics — I and II.” The group sought to examine the dynamics of liquid
droplets in ﬂight and photographed droplet impacts, providing a more accu-
rate understanding of the action often referred to as “wave cast-off.” In “Blood
Droplet Dynamics — II,” Pizzola et al. clearly demonstrated that motion in
the target could mimic characteristics of an impact at an angle greater than
that which occurred. Their ﬁndings are extremely important in our efforts
to understand dynamic scenes of crime.46
In 1989, William Eckert and Stuart James published Interpretation of
Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes. Although the book received a very crit-
ical review in the Journal of Forensic Science, it was the ﬁrst attempt in almost
seven years to tackle bloodstain pattern analysis as a single reference text.
The following year, the International Association for Identiﬁcation (IAI)
accepted bloodstain pattern analysis as a tentative discipline, removing it as
a subcategory of crime scene analysis. That same year, we wrote Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice — A Laboratory Manual.
In 1998, James and Eckert published the second edition of Interpretation
of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes with CRC Press, signiﬁcantly adding
to its value. Prior omissions were corrected and the text remains a valuable
reference.
James followed this work with Scientiﬁc and Legal Applications of Blood-
stain Pattern Interpretation. James put together an impressive group of con-
tributors, including Alfred Carter, Ph.D., William Fischer, Carol Henderson,
Paul Erwin Kish, Maria Saccoccio, and T. Pualette Sutton. The text was
* In support of this role, each year the IABPA hosts training seminars dealing with blood-
stain pattern analysis and other related forensic disciplines.


--- PAGE 44 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective 17
directed toward trial counsel in an effort to help lawyers better understand
how to apply bloodstain pattern analysis in criminal trials.
Summary
Whatever we might say of bloodstain pattern analysis, it has a rich history;
one that indicates the consideration of bloodstains in solving crime predates
even modern forensics. As to the issue of being a “new” discipline, the
examination and consideration of bloodstain patterns and their historical
acceptance in forensics is well documented. Long recognized for its ability
to support the evaluation of scenes of crime, bloodstain pattern analysis
serves the investigator by illuminating “what happened.” It cannot tell us in
all cases “who,” but as Piotrowski and Hesselink discussed, the ability to deﬁne
the “situation” or “circumstances” of the crime is often just as important.
Working with an understanding of all areas of forensics and with expe-
rience in evaluating crime scenes, the investigator can often use bloodstain
pattern analysis to reconstruct the events surrounding a given incident. More
and more, this process of crime scene reconstruction is being tested in our
judicial system, but it is only through the application of quality objective
analyses that the discipline can hope to serve its intended function. As ana-
lysts, our purpose must always be to guard against subjective analysis.
As we wrote in 1990, “each day, blood from scenes of a crime cries out to
investigators.” The use of proper bloodstain pattern analysis simply enhances
the criminalist’s ability to be an active listener to this very vocal witness.47
References
1. Anon., The Bible, Genesis, 4:10.
2. MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, Laboratory of
Forensic Science, Corning, NY, 1982, p. 4.
3. Geberth, Vernon J., Practical Homicide Investigation, 2nd ed., Elsevier, New
York, 1990, p. 12.
4. Anon., From a Public Television program. Our apologies to the author and
show, as they were not identiﬁed.
5. Ressler, Robert K. (et al., Sexual Homicide: Patterns and Motives, Lexington
Books, Lexington, MA, 1988, p. 155.
6. Ibid., p. 162.
7. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and
Practice — A Laboratory Manual, TBI Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 1.
8. Lewis, Craig A., Blood Evidence, Berkeley Books, New York, 1992, p. 168.


--- PAGE 45 ---

18
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
9. Hinckeldey, Christopher, Criminal Justice through the Ages, Druckerei Shulis,
Heilbron, Germany, 1981, p. 55.
10. Ibid., p. 74.
11. Ibid., p. 922.
12. Doyle, Arthur C., The Original Illustrated Strand Sherlock Holmes, Words-
worth Editions, Hertfordshire, England, 1990, p. 21.
13. MacDonell, Herbert L., Segments of History: The Literature of Bloodstain
Pattern Interpretation, International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
News, Volume 8, Number 1, March 1992.
14. Dearborn, Regina, Personal communications, January 1993.
15. Lassaingne, J. B., Neue Untersuchung zur Erkennung von Blutﬂecken auf
Eisen und Stahl, Viertaljahresschrift für gerichtliche und öffentliche Medicin,
1856, pp. 285–289.
16. MacDonell, International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts News,
op. cit.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.
19. Piotrowski, Eduard, Über Entstehung, Form, Richtung und Ausbreitung der
Blutspuren nach Hiebwunden des Kopfes, Golos Printing, Elmira Heights, NY,
1992, p. 8 (German version).
20. Ibid., p. 18 (German version).
21. Ibid., p. 16 (German version).
22. Ibid., p. 32 (English version).
23. As quoted by MacDonell, Herbert L., Segments of History: The Literature of
Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, International Association of Bloodstain Pat-
tern Analysts News, Volume 8, Number 4, December 1992.
24. Gross, Hans, Dr., Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als System der Krimi-
nalistik, J. Swietzer Verlag, Munich, Germany, 1904.
25. Haberda, H., Eine besondere Form von Blutspritzen, Viertaljahresschrift fur
gerichtliche und offentliche Medizin, Volume 47, Supplement IX, 1914, pp.
380–381.
26. Ibid., p. 381.
27. Lochte, Theodor and Ziemke, Ernest, Gerichtsärztliche und polizeiartzliche
Technik, J. F. Bergmann, Wiesbaden, Germany, 1914, p. 152.
28. Ibid., p. 153.
29. Ibid., pp. 157–158.
30. Ibid., p. 164.
31. Hesselink, W. F., Blutspuren in der kriminalistischen Praxis, Zeitschrift fur die
angewandte Chemie, Volume 44, Number 31, 1931, pp. 653–654.
32. Ibid., p. 655.


--- PAGE 46 ---

Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Its Function and a Historical Perspective 19
33. Ibid.
34. Rhodes, Henry T. F., Some Persons Unknown, John Murray, London, 1931,
pp. 193–208.
35. Rhodes, Henry T. F., Clues and Crime, John Murray, London, 1933, p. 58.
36. Balthazard, Victor, Piedelievre, R., Desolilles, Henri, and Derobert, L., Etude
des Gouttes de Sang Projecte, XXII Congres de Medicine Legale, Paris, France,
June 1939, p. 1.
37. Ibid., p. 6.
38. Ibid., p. 8.
39. Ibid., p. 25.
40. Ibid., p. 27.
41. MacDonell, Herbert L., Eulogy for Dr. Gohringer presented by H. MacDonell
to the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts Training Con-
ference, November 12, 1999.
42. Kirk, Paul L., Crime Investigation Physical Evidence and the Police Laboratory,
Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York, 1953, p. xii.
43. Kirk, Paul L., Afﬁdavit Regarding the State of Ohio vs. Samuel H. Sheppard,
Court of Common Pleas, Criminal Branch, No. 64571, 26 April 1955.
44. Radziki, Jozef, Slady Krwi w Praktyce Sledczej, (Bloostain Prints in Practice
of Technology) Wydawnictwo Zakladu Kryminalistyki, Komendy Glowenj
MO, Warsaw, Poland, 1960.
45. Lee, Henry L., Deforest, Peter, and Gaensslen, R. E., Forensic Science: An
Introduction to Criminalistics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.
46. Pizzola, P. A., Roth, S., and Deforest, P. R., Blood Droplet Dynamics — II,
Journal of Forensic Sciences, JFSCA, Volume 31, Number 1, January 1986, p. 58.
47. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and
Practice — A Laboratory Manual, TBI, Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 4.


--- PAGE 47 ---



--- PAGE 48 ---

References
1 Chapter 1. Bloodstain Pattern Analysis:
Its Function and a Historical Perspective
1. Anon., The Bible, Genesis, 4:10.
2. MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning,
NY, 1982, p. 4.
3. Geberth, Vernon J., Practical Homicide Investigation,
2nd ed., Elsevier, New York, 1990, p. 12.
4. Anon., From a Public Television program. Our apologies
to the author and show, as they were not identified.
5. Ressler, Robert K. (et al., Sexual Homicide: Patterns
and Motives, Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, 1988, p. 155.
6. Ibid., p. 162.
7. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis: Theory and Practice — A Laboratory Manual, TBI
Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 1.
8. Lewis, Craig A., Blood Evidence, Berkeley Books, New
York, 1992, p. 168.
9. Hinckeldey, Christopher, Criminal Justice through the
Ages, Druckerei Shulis, Heilbron, Germany, 1981, p. 55.
10. Ibid., p. 74.
11. Ibid., p. 922.
12. Doyle, Arthur C., The Original Illustrated Strand
Sherlock Holmes, Wordsworth Editions, Hertfordshire,
England, 1990, p. 21.
13. MacDonell, Herbert L., Segments of History: The
Literature of Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation,
International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
News, Volume 8, Number 1, March 1992.
14. Dearborn, Regina, Personal communications, January 1993.
15. Lassaingne, J. B., Neue Untersuchung zur Erkennung von
Blutflecken auf Eisen und Stahl, Viertaljahresschrift für
gerichtliche und öffentliche Medicin, 1856, pp. 285–289.


--- PAGE 49 ---

16. MacDonell, International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts News, op. cit.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.
19. Piotrowski, Eduard, Über Entstehung, Form, Richtung und
Ausbreitung der Blutspuren nach Hiebwunden des Kopfes,
Golos Printing, Elmira Heights, NY, 1992, p. 8 (German
version).
20. Ibid., p. 18 (German version).
21. Ibid., p. 16 (German version).
22. Ibid., p. 32 (English version).
23. As quoted by MacDonell, Herbert L., Segments of
History: The Literature of Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation, International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts News, Volume 8, Number 4, December 1992.
24. Gross, Hans, Dr., Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter als
System der Kriminalistik, J. Swietzer Verlag, Munich,
Germany, 1904.
25. Haberda, H., Eine besondere Form von Blutspritzen,
Viertaljahresschrift fur gerichtliche und offentliche
Medizin, Volume 47, Supplement IX, 1914, pp. 380–381.
26. Ibid., p. 381.
27. Lochte, Theodor and Ziemke, Ernest, Gerichtsärztliche
und polizeiartzliche Technik, J. F. Bergmann, Wiesbaden,
Germany, 1914, p. 152.
28. Ibid., p. 153.
29. Ibid., pp. 157–158.
30. Ibid., p. 164.
31. Hesselink, W. F., Blutspuren in der kriminalistischen
Praxis, Zeitschrift fur die angewandte Chemie, Volume 44,
Number 31, 1931, pp. 653–654.
32. Ibid., p. 655.


--- PAGE 50 ---

33. Ibid.
34. Rhodes, Henry T. F., Some Persons Unknown, John Murray,
London, 1931, pp. 193–208.
35. Rhodes, Henry T. F., Clues and Crime, John Murray,
London, 1933, p. 58.
36. Balthazard, Victor, Piedelievre, R., Desolilles, Henri,
and Derobert, L., Etude des Gouttes de Sang Projecte, XXII
Congres de Medicine Legale, Paris, France, June 1939, p. 1.
37. Ibid., p. 6.
38. Ibid., p. 8.
39. Ibid., p. 25.
40. Ibid., p. 27.
41. MacDonell, Herbert L., Eulogy for Dr. Gohringer
presented by H. MacDonell to the International Association
of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts Training Conference,
November 12, 1999.
42. Kirk, Paul L., Crime Investigation Physical Evidence
and the Police Laboratory, Interscience Publishers, Inc.,
New York, 1953, p. xii.
43. Kirk, Paul L., Affidavit Regarding the State of Ohio
vs. Samuel H. Sheppard, Court of Common Pleas, Criminal
Branch, No. 64571, 26 April 1955.
44. Radziki, Jozef, Slady Krwi w Praktyce Sledczej,
(Bloostain Prints in Practice of Technology) Wydawnictwo
Zakladu Kryminalistyki, Komendy Glowenj MO, Warsaw, Poland,
1960.
45. Lee, Henry L., Deforest, Peter, and Gaensslen, R. E.,
Forensic Science: An Introduction to Criminalistics,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.
46. Pizzola, P. A., Roth, S., and Deforest, P. R., Blood
Droplet Dynamics — II, Journal of Forensic Sciences, JFSCA,
Volume 31, Number 1, January 1986, p. 58.
47. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis: Theory and Practice — A Laboratory Manual, TBI,
Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 4.


--- PAGE 51 ---

4 Chapter 4. Understanding the Medium of
Blood
Figure 4.25 Stain shape and impact angle. The orderly
collapse of the droplet
onto the target produces characteristic shapes depending on
the angle of impact.
The less acute the angle (e.g., 90°), the more circular the
stain. The more acute
the angle (e.g., 20°), the more elliptical the resulting
stain. 5. Ibid., p. 441. 6. Ibid., p. 442. 7. Ibid., p.
441. 8. Ibid. 9. Ibid., p. 449. 10. Ibid. 11. Ibid., pp.
449–452. 12. Ibid., p. 490. 13. Huetinick, Linda, Physics,
Cliff Notes, Lincoln, NE, 1993, p. 49. 14. McDonald, James
E., The Shape of Raindrops, Scientiﬁc American, Volume 190,
Number 2, February 1954. 15. Ibid. 16. Carter, A. L.,
Personal communications, July 1992. 17. Strand, Fleur L.,
Physiology: A Regulatory Systems Approach, Macmillan, New
York, 1978, pp. 239–241. 18. Peterson, Ivars, Raindrop
Oscillations — Raindrops Do More Than Just Fall; They Also
Appear to Oscillate during Their Downward Plunge, Science
News, Volume 127, pp. 136–137. 19. Ryan, Robert T., The
Behavior of Large, Low-Surface-Tension Water Drops Falling
at Terminal Velocity in Air, Journal of Applied
Meteorology, Volume 15, Number 2, February 1976. 20. Ibid.
21. Pizzola, P. A. (et al.) Blood Droplet Dynamics — I,
Journal of Forensic Sciences, Volume 31, Number 1, January
1986, p. 44. 22. MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning NY,
1982, p. 4. 23. Ibid., p. 8. 24. Gardner, Ross M.,
Deformation Levels of Blood Droplets Created by Impact,
Presented to the International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts, Albuquerque, NM, November 9, 1996. 25.
van Netten, A. A. and Dewey, J. M., Bloodspatter 2 Final
Report, DMA Report 97/2, Dewey McMillin and Associates
Ltd., Victoria, BC, Canada, March 1997. 26. Peterson,
Ivars, op. cit. 27. Beard, Kenneth V., Personal
communications, September 1989. 28. Gardner, op. cit. 29.
Raymond, Anthony, Science and Justice, July 1996. 30.
Gardner, op. cit. 31. Ibid. 32. Ibid. 33. TRACKS © is a
copyright name of software created by Forensic Computing of
Ottawa, Canada. 34. MacDonell, op. cit., p. 4. 35. Eckert,
William G. and James, Stuart H., Interpretation of
Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, Elsevier, New York,
1989, p. 15. 36. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M.,
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory and Practice — A
Laboratory Manual, TBI Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 9.


--- PAGE 52 ---

37. Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Droplet Dynamics and
Oscillation Damping, Presentation at the 76th Annual
Training Conference of the International Association of
Identification, St. Louis, MO, July 1991. 38. Pizzola, op.
cit. 39. Balthazard, V. (et al.), Etude des Gouttes de Sang
Projecte, Report presented to the 22nd Congress of Legal
Medicine, Paris, June 1939, p. 17. 40. MacDonell, op. cit.,
p. 7. 41. Carter, Alfred and Podworny, Edward J., Computer
Modelling of Trajectories of Blood Droplets and Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis with a PC Computer, 2nd Annual IABPA
Training Conference, Dallas, TX, December 1989. 42.
MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Patterns, Golas Printing,
Elmira Heights, NY, 1993, pp. 9–11. 43. Metropolitan Police
Laboratory, “Blood in Slow Motion,” Droplet Dynamic Video,
London, England, 1991. 44. Ibid.


--- PAGE 53 ---

6 Chapter 6. Determining the Point of
Convergence and the Point of Origin
1. Carter, Alfred, BackTrack/Strings® User Manual, Forensic
Computing of Ottawa, Canada, 1992, p. 17.
2. Wolson, Toby, Documentation of Bloodstain Patterns,
Presentation to the International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts (IABPA), Colorado Springs, CO, September
25, 1992.
3. MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Pattern
Interpretation, Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning,
NY, 1982.
4. Balthazard, Victor, Piedelievre, R., Desoille, Henri,
and Derobert, L., Etude des Gouttes de Sang Projecte, XXII
Congres de Medicine Legale, Paris, France, June 1939, p.
25.
5. MacDonell, Herbert L., Balthazard Was Great but He
Didn’t String Us Along, Int. Assoc. of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts News, Volume 11, Number 1, March 1995, p. 10.


--- PAGE 54 ---

7 Chapter 7. Evaluating Impact Spatter
Bloodstains
1. MacDonell, H. and Bialousz, Lorraine F., Flight
Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human Blood, National
Institute of Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, LEAA
Report PR-71, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C., November 1971, pp. 20–21.
2. Ibid., p. 20.
3. Ibid., p. 21.
4. Bevel, Tom and Gardner, Ross M., Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis: Theory and Practice — A Laboratory Manual, TBI
Inc., Oklahoma City, OK, 1990, p. 18.
5. Parker, N. Leroy (et al.), Summary Report of the
Bloodstain Analysis Research Group, Florida Department of
Law Enforcement, Tallahassee, 1982, p. 65.
6. Ibid., p. 66.
7. Ibid., pp. 57 and 66.
8. Bunker, Judy, Presentation to the Rocky Mountain
Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, April 22, 1991.
9. MacDonell, H., Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation,
Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning, NY, 1982, p. 3.
10. Ryan, Robert T., The Behaviour of Large,
Low-Surface-Tension Water Drops Falling at Terminal
Velocity in Air, J. Appl. Meteorol., Volume 15, Number 2,
February 1976.
11. Pex, James O. and Vaughan, Charles H., Observations of
High Velocity Bloodspatter on Adjacent Objects, Journal of
Forensic Sciences, Volume 32, Number 6, November 1987, pp.
1587–1594.
12. Beard, Kenneth V., Personal communication, September
1989.
13. Gardner, Ross M., Deformation Levels of Blood Droplets
Created by Impact, Presented to the International
Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, Albuquerque,
NM, November 9, 1996.
14. MacDonell, Herbert, L., Bloodstain Patterns, Golas


--- PAGE 55 ---

Printing, Elmira Heights, NY, 1993, p. 61.
15. Eckert, William G. and James, Stuart H., Interpretation
of Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, Elsevier, New York,
1989, p. 55.
16. MacDonell, H., Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation,
Laboratory of Forensic Science, Corning, NY, 1982, p. 70.
17. MacDonell and Bialousz, op. cit., p. 21.
18. Laber, Terry L. and Epstein, Barton P., Experiments and
Practical Exercises in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis,
Minnesota B.C.A. Forensic Science Laboratory, St. Paul, MN,
November 1983, p. 38.
19. Ibid.
20. Pex and Vaughn, op. cit., p. 1588.
21. Fackler, Martin L., Col. (Ret.), M.D., Presentation to
the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts, Colorado Springs, CO, September 24, 1992.
22. Fackler, Martin L., Col. (Ret.), M.D. (et al.),
Emergency War Surgery, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 1988, pp. 13–32.
23. Fackler, Martin L., Personal communications, August
1995.
24. Fackler, Martin L., Col. (Ret.), M.D. (et al.),
Emergency War Surgery, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 1988, p. 17.
25. Fackler, Martin L., Col. (Ret.), M.D., Presentation to
the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern
Analysts, Colorado Springs, CO, September 24, 1992.
26. Ibid.
27. MacDonell, Herbert L., Bloodstain Patterns, Golas
Printing, Elmira Heights, NY, 1993, p. 64.


--- PAGE 56 ---

8 Chapter 8. Characteristic Blood
Patterns That Aid in Analysis
Figure 8.36 A close-up photograph of the detail in Stain A.
Many clothing stains
are critical, so there must be no question in the jury’s
minds as to their location. 8. Lee, Henry C., Gaensslen, R.
E., and Pagliaro, Elaine M., Bloodstain Volume Estimation,
International Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
News, Volume 3, Number 2, October 1986, pp. 47–55. 9.
Slemko, Joseph, Bloodstains on Fabric: The Effects of
Droplet Velocity and Fabric Composition, Presentation to
the IABPA, Houston, Texas, November 9, 1999. 10. Ibid.


--- PAGE 57 ---

9 Chapter 9. Documenting Bloodstains
1. Lee, Henry C. (et al.), The Effect of Presumptive Test,
Latent Fingerprint and Other Reagents and Materials on
Subsequent Serological Identification, Genetic Marker and
DNA Testing in Bloodstains, J. Forensic Identiﬁcation,
Volume 39, Number 6, November/December 1989, pp. 339–358.
2. Svensson, Arne, Wendel, Otto, and Fisher, Barry A. J.,
Techniques of Crime Scene Investigation, 3rd ed., Elsevier,
New York, p. 173.
3. Sahs, Paul T., DAB: An Advancement in Blood Print
Detection, J. Forensic Identiﬁcation, Volume 42, Number 5,
September/October 1992, p. 412.
4. Anon., Blood Detection, Document provided by the Rocky
Mountain Association of Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, 1988.
5. Gimeno, Fred E. and Rini, Gary A., Fill Flash Photo
Luminescence to Photograph Luminol Bloodstain Patterns, J.
Forensic Identiﬁcation, Volume 39, Number 3, 1989, p. 149.
6. Hetzel, Richard L., Luminol as an Investigative Tool,
The Detective, Fall 1990.
7. Ibid.
8. Perkins, Doug, Personal communications, 1995.
9. Gimeno, op. cit.
10. Gimeno, Fred E. and Rini, Gary A., Fill Flash Color
Photography to Photograph Luminol Bloodstain Patterns, J.
Forensic Identiﬁcation, Volume 39, Number 5, 1989.
11. Wolson, Toby L., Bloodstain Pattern Documentation
Workshop, Presentation to the International Association of
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, Colorado Springs, CO,
September 26, 1992.
12. Epstein, Barton P., Examination of Bloody Clothing,
Presentation to the International Association of Bloodstain
Pattern Analysts, Colorado Springs, CO, September 25, 1992.
13. Bunker, Judy, Documenting and Reconstructing Blood
Scenes, Presentation to the Rocky Mountain Association of
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts, Advanced Bloodstain Pattern
course, Jefferson County, CO, April 22, 1991.


--- PAGE 58 ---

14. Ibid.


--- PAGE 59 ---

12 Chapter 12. Presenting Evidence at
Trial
Figure 12.4 The foam core model. Although not used as often
due to the avail
ability of software programs, such models are still
effective tools. 3. Dershowitz, Alan, As quoted by William
F. Buckley, Jr., in “Simpson Lawyer Ambiguous on Verdict,”
United Press Syndicate, June 9, 1996. 4. Arizona
Prosecuting Attorneys’ Advisory Council and Arizona Law
Enforcement Officers’ Advisory Council, Courtroom
Demeanor, Phoenix, AZ, 1982, pp. 21.01–21.15.
