

--- PAGE 1 ---

Bloodstain pattern analysis—Casework experience
B. Karger *, S. Rand 1, T. Fracasso, H. Pfeiffer
Institute of Legal Medicine, University of Mu¨nster, Ro¨ntgenstrasse 62, 48149 Mu¨nster, Germany
1. Introduction
Reconstruction of the events from autopsy and scene ﬁndings is
one essential objective in death investigations. The presence of
bloodstains at the crime scene can be of major importance for the
investigation and reconstruction. In addition to haemogenetic
individualisation, the morphology and distribution of bloodstain
patterns can provide vital information on the character, number
and chain of events, which have caused the bloody scene. Before
such interpretation of bloodstain patterns can be carried out
reliably, the expert must have built up knowledge of and
experience in the types of stains and distributions, which may
be caused by various forms of injuries and mechanisms. In addition
to systematic studies [1–4,6,8,9,10,11,13–18,20,21,23,26], case
reports [5,12,22,24,27,28] may signiﬁcantly contribute to the
validation
of
bloodstain
pattern
analyses,
especially
if
the
reconstruction is conﬁrmed by witnesses or perpetrators. This is
why a series of illustrative case examples involving various
bloodstain distribution patterns is presented where the mechan-
ism of production was veriﬁed by a confession of the offender. The
cases originated from the Institute of Legal Medicine, University of
Mu¨nster, Germany, where crime scenes are regularly investigated.
2. Case reports
2.1. Case 1: arterial blood spatters originating from a corpse?
A 23-year-old man was found dead near his car in some woods.
The missing head had been severed at the level of the 6th cervical
vertebra, which showed 3 deep notches. Signs of severe anaemia
were obvious in the trunk of the body, but only a few bloodstains
were found inside the boot of the car. A suspect, who was soon
arrested, led the police to the site in the wood where he had buried
the head, which showed 2 intracranial gunshot wounds from a 5.6-
mm rimﬁre riﬂe. The suspect claimed that he had performed the
decapitation with an axe in an aviary, after the victim was dead.
The crime scene investigation in the aviary (3 m  3 m) (Fig. 1a)
took place 5 days after the killing. On the left side of the door, the
lower part of the wire netting showed abundant tiny blood
deposits and a large diagonal smear stain directed downwards.
Below these stains and covered by some sand, the soil was soaked
with blood over an area measuring 80 cm  25 cm and up to 20 cm
deep. A wooden beam at the bottom of the wire netting also
showed extensive red–brown discolouration from blood. On the
Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 18 March 2008
Received in revised form 28 May 2008
Accepted 25 July 2008
Available online 14 September 2008
Keywords:
Bloodstain distribution pattern
Casework
Interpretation
A B S T R A C T
The morphology of bloodstain distribution patterns at the crime scene carries vital information for a
reconstruction of the events. Contrary to experimental work, case reports where the reconstruction has
been veriﬁed have rarely been published. This is the reason why a series of four illustrative cases is
presented where bloodstain pattern analysis at the crime scene made a reconstruction of the events
possible and where this reconstruction was later veriﬁed by a confession of the offender. The cases
include various types of bloodstains such as contact and smear stains, drop stains, arterial blood spatter
and splash stains from both impact and cast-off pattern. Problems frequently encountered in practical
casework are addressed, such as unfavourable environmental conditions or combinations of different
bloodstain patterns. It is also demonstrated that the analysis of bloodstain morphology can support
individualisation of stains by directing the selection of a limited number of stains from a complex pattern
for DNA analysis. The complexity of real situations suggests a step-by-step approach starting with a
comprehensive view of the overall picture. This is followed by a differentiation and analysis of single
bloodstain patterns and a search for informative details. It is ideal when the expert inspecting the crime
scene has also performed the autopsy, but he deﬁnitely must have detailed knowledge of the injuries of
the deceased/injured and of the possible mechanisms of production.
 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 251 8355174; fax: +49 251 8355158.
E-mail address: karger@uni-muenster.de (B. Karger).
1 S. Rand, now works at the University Hospital Antwerp, Wilrijkstraat 10, 2650
Edegem, Belgium.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forsciint
0379-0738/$ – see front matter  2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.forsciint.2008.07.010


--- PAGE 2 ---

right side of this blood stain, abundant splash stains in the form of
tiny circular and elongatedbloodstainswerestillvisibleon the beam
(Fig. 1b). The stains extended over a distance of 70 cm. On the left
side of the pool of blood, large droplet stains were found beneath the
sand, and a small passage to a stable showed additional droplet
stains and large smear stains on the ﬂoor and walls.
The perpetrator had ﬁred the gunshots to the head while the
victim was sitting in the sand and the falling head had caused the
smear stain on the wire netting. Decapitation with the axe
produced most of the pool of blood as well as abundant arterial
spray stains, which were still present on the right side of the beam.
This and the large amount of blood present required active heart
Fig. 1. (a) Sketch of the aviary 5 days after the killing. The wire netting shows a diagonal smear stain (6) and tiny splash stains (1), a wooden beam below (1) shows both tiny
circular and elongated splash stains (compare with (b)). A pool of blood and dropping stains (2) are present in the sand. Additional dropping stains (3) and smear stains (5)
were found in a passage and contact stains (4) on a table. (b) Remnants of arterial blood spatter: the wire netting with multiple tiny stains and the wooden beam showing
multiple circular and elongated splash stains directed from left to right. The irregular morphology of the stains reﬂects the irregular adsorption of the wooden surface. (For
interpretation of the references to color in the text, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)
B. Karger et al. / Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
16


--- PAGE 3 ---

function. Therefore, the decapitation must have been performed
shortly after the gunshots when the victim’s heart was still beating.
The corpse had subsequently been dragged through the passage,
which had caused the droplet and smear stains. In court, the
perpetrator veriﬁed this reconstruction.
2.2. Case 2: dynamic or static situation?
A 52-year-old man was beaten to death with a metal pipe in his
living room. Autopsy veriﬁed ﬁve distinct fracture systems of the
skull, each originating from a blow. The cause of death was cerebral
injury. A suspect who admitted to have killed the man in a ﬁght
was arrested. An important factor in the reconstruction was the
exact location where the fatal blows had been delivered and the
dynamics of the chain of events.
The corpse was lying in front of a sofa in a pool of blood. A panel
close to the head of the corpse showed a tight pattern of impact
splash stains (Fig. 2). This and abundant radial blood spatter stains
present on the sofa and walls indicated that the victim had not
moved. Contrary to all other objects in the vicinity, an armchair
was completely spared of bloodstains: it had been shielded by the
body of the perpetrator. This means that all or most blows had been
delivered while the assailant and the victim remained in the same
position. This is incompatible with a dynamic situation such as a
ﬁght. In court, the defendant admitted that he had taken his
acquaintance by surprise. The man collapsed in front of the sofa
and the defendant had delivered additional blows to the head
while standing in front of the chair.
2.3. Case 3: the sequence of events can make the difference
A young mother and her two children aged 6 months and 2
years were found dead, each lying in their bed at home. A bloody
axe was present at the scene and the three victims had suffered
fatal brain injuries from multiple blows with this axe. The husband
claimed that his wife had ﬁrst killed the two children and that he
subsequently had killed her after he had seen what she had done.
The crucial question was the sequence of events.
The three victims were lying in their beds in separate rooms
with a large number of bloodstains present on the beds, the
victims, walls and at the ceilings. The wife showed numerous tiny
splash stains, among others, on the back of the left hand (Fig. 3a). A
cot where the 2-year-old child had been killed had a defect in the
top rail of the bed frame made up of 3 separate notches covered
with blood (Fig. 3b): the perpetrator had struck the wood three
times with the bloody axe.
DNA analysis demonstrated that the blood on the woman’s left
hand matched her own and that the blood from the notched defect
on the bed frame came from both the child and the mother. The
lack of the children’s blood on the woman’s hand and the presence
of the mixed stain in the notch strongly suggested that the wife had
been killed before the children. Additionally, blood spatter stains at
the sleeves and pants of the husband originated from all three
victims, while the clothing of the wife only carried her own blood.
When the husband was confronted with this evidence, he
confessed that he had ﬁrst murdered his wife and then his children.
2.4. Case 4: the needle in the haystack
A young woman was found severely injured lying on a driveway
(Fig. 4a). She had been sexually attacked, the trousers and pants
pulled down to the ankles. She died at the scene from repeated
blunt force to the head and severe blood aspiration. The head
formed the centre of a blood spatter pattern present on the wall
behind her (Fig. 4a). Her clothing, including the jeans (Fig. 4b), was
heavily covered with blood. Blood draining from the head and face
injuries, spatter and dropping stains, large smear stains and small
contact stains could be distinguished, and the skin of the hands,
upper legs, and abdomen also showed blood deposits.
The police later arrested a suspect who had a superﬁcial tear
injury at the hand, and there was a chance that he had been
bleeding slightly during the assault. Since the perpetrator may
have left small contact stains on the jeans, pants or shirt when he
pulled them down with his hands, a total of 60 stains were selected
on
the
basis
of
their
morphology
from
the
hundreds
of
distinguishable ones for DNA analysis. Stain number 41 located
on the jeans was a tiny contact stain (Fig. 4c). This stain was the
only one analysed which did not originate from the victim herself,
and the alleles matched those of the suspect who subsequently
confessed.
3. Discussion
It is clear from the presented cases that bloodstain pattern
interpretation and autopsy are closely related. The type, number
and location of injuries present in a victim are of great importance
for the interpretation of the resulting bloody scene. In our
experience, it is ideal when autopsy and scene investigation are
carried out by the same person, or when the scene is also visited by
the person performing the autopsy. Bloodstain pattern analysis is a
traditional topic of Legal Medicine in Germany [14], in countries
with a different tradition, close exchange of information between
bloodstain experts and forensic pathologists should be guaranteed.
Fig. 2. Panel behind the victim’s head (covered by his blue shirt). The original
position of the panel was horizontal, i.e. with an anti-clockwise rotation relative to
the photograph. Note the sparing of the head on the panel (marked by the arrow),
the multiplicity of splashing stains and the transition to an external zone with
elongated stains radiating outwards. (For interpretation of the references to color in
the ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)
B. Karger et al. / Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
17


--- PAGE 4 ---

It is also clear that the complexity of real situations exceeds the
ﬁndings in experimental simulations by far. Different bloodstain
patterns may be combined (cases 1–4), the absence of bloodstains
in places where stains would be expected as well as the
accumulation of stains can be important (cases 2 and 4), and
environmental conditions may be very unfavourable (case 1). The
complexity of real situations suggests a step-by-step approach
according
to
which
bloodstain
patterns
should
initially
be
evaluated
as
a
whole.
This
makes
it
possible
to
gain
a
comprehensive
view
and
to
distinguish
various
bloodstain
patterns, which were caused by different events. This approach
is assisted by a rough sketch of the bloodstains at the scene (Fig. 1).
Interpretation of single bloodstain patterns follows in a second and
a search for informative details in a third step. Details may prove to
be very important (cases 3 and 4), however, they should only be
interpreted in the context of the pattern and the possible chain of
events; otherwise, conclusions based on isolated details may prove
to be incorrect. Searching for bloodstains requires imagination of
the bloodstain patterns possibly produced by injuries known to be
present or by actions of the perpetrator, and it should be assisted
by adequate equipment such as infrared light or the luminol test
[7,19,29].
In theory, individualisation of stains and analysis of bloodstain
morphology are two distinct approaches but in casework both
methods can assist each other. In particular, the selection of a
limited number of stains from a complex bloodstain pattern for
DNA analysis should be directed by the morphology of the stains.
This is demonstrated by cases 3 and 4. In case 3, the events were
Fig. 3. (a) The back of the woman’s left hand showing multiple small splash stains and larger smear stains. Some of the splash stains, including those numbered, were used for
DNA analysis. (b) The notches in the top rail of the bed frame with contact and splash stains.
B. Karger et al. / Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
18


--- PAGE 5 ---

Fig. 4. (a) The position of the victim after unsuccessful emergency measures. The impact splash stains on the wall caused by kicking or beating the head are radially arranged
around a pool of blood, which is where the head had originally been lying. (b) The front side of the jeans of the victim showing numerous blood stains including splash, smear
and contact stains. (c) A detail from the upper left front side of the victim’s jeans depicting stain number 41 (below and left to the lettering ‘‘41’’), a tiny red–brown
discolouration apparently transferred by contact. This was the only stain originating from the perpetrator. (For interpretation of the references to color in the ﬁgure caption,
the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)
B. Karger et al. / Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
19


--- PAGE 6 ---

reconstructed by bloodstain morphology, which made it possible
to select the decisive stain in the notch for DNA analysis. In case 4,
the analysis of bloodstains selected with respect to the possible
mechanism of production identiﬁed the perpetrator. Frequently,
the differentiation of small contact stains from droplets on fabric
[11,25] is relevant in this context.
In conclusion, analysis of bloodstain patterns at crime scenes
should be based on detailed scientiﬁc knowledge, but the possible
complexity and uniqueness of real situations also requires con-
siderable case experience and a reserved attitude including strict
adherence to scientiﬁc standards. This is necessary to reliably utilise
the large potential of this method in crime scene reconstruction.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank Professor Bernd Brinkmann for his com-
ments.
References
[1] S. Anderson, B. Howard, G.R. Hobbs, C.P. Bishop, A method for determining the age
of a bloodstain, Forensic Sci. Int. 148 (2005) 37–45.
[2] V. Balthazard, R. Piedelievre, H. Desoille, L. Derobert, Etude des gouttes de sang
projete, Ann. Med. Leg. Crim. Pol. Sci. Med. Soc. Tox. 19 (1939) 265–323.
[3] B. Brinkmann, B. Madea, S. Rand, Charakterisierung von Mikroblutspuren, Z.
Rechtsmed. 94 (1985) 237–244.
[4] B. Brinkmann, B. Madea, S. Rand, Zu den Einﬂußfaktoren auf die Morphologie der
Blutspur, Beitr. Gerichtl. Med. 44 (1986) 67–73.
[5] B.R. Burnett, J.M. Orantes, M.L. Pierson, An unusual bloodstain case, J. Forensic Sci.
42 (1997) 519–523.
[6] P.R. DeForest, A review of Interpretation of bloodstain evidence at crime scenes, J.
Forensic Sci. 35 (1990) 1491–1495.
[7] A. DuChesne, T. Bajanowski, B. Brinkmann, Aufﬁndung und Dokumentation
maskierter Blutspuren, Arch. Kriminol. 192 (1993) 159–166.
[8] L. Hulse-Smith, M. Illes, A blind trial evaluation of a crime scene methodology for
deducing impact velocity and drop size from circular blood stains, J. Forensic Sci.
52 (2007) 65–69.
[9] B. Karger, R. Nu¨ sse, G. Schroeder, S. Wu¨ stenbecker, B. Brinkmann, Backspatter
from experimental close-range shots to the head. I. Macrobackspatter, Int. J. Legal
Med. 109 (1996) 66–74.
[10] B. Karger, R. Nu¨sse, H.D. Tro¨ger, B. Brinkmann, Backspatter from experimental
close-range shots to the head. II. Microbackspatter and the morphology of blood-
stains, Int. J. Legal Med. 110 (1997) 27–30.
[11] B. Karger, S. Rand, B. Brinkmann, Experimental bloodstains on fabric from contact
and from droplets, Int. J. Legal Med. 111 (1998) 17–21.
[12] M. Kleiber, D. Stiller, P. Wiegand, Assessment of shooting distance on the basis of
bloodstain analysis and histological examinations, Forensic Sci. Int. 119 (2001)
260–262.
[13] C. Knock, M. Davison, Predicting the position of the source of blood stains for
angled impacts, J. Forensic Sci. 52 (2007) 1044–1049.
[14] T. Lochte, U¨ ber die Kronenbildung des auffallenden Bluttropfens und ihre
Beziehungen zu sekunda¨ren Blutspritzern, Dtsch. Z. Gerichtl. Med. 22 (1933)
387–396.
[15] H.L. MacDonell, Bloodstain Pattern Interpretation, Laboratory of Forensic Science
Publishers, New York, 1982, pp. 16–21.
[16] P.A. Pizzola, S. Roth, P.R. De Forest, Blood droplet dynamics-I, J. Forensic Sci. 31
(1986) 36–49.
[17] P.A. Pizzola, S. Roth, P.R. De Forest, Blood droplet dynamics-II, J. Forensic Sci. 31
(1986) 50–64.
[18] S. Rand, B. Madea, B. Brinkmann, Zur Systematik des Spurenbildes bei Schlag-
spritzspuren, Beitr. Ger. Med. 44 (1986) 75–80.
[19] M.A. Raymond, R.L. Hall, An interesting application of infra-red reﬂection photo-
graphy to blood splash pattern interpretation, Forensic Sci. Int. 31 (1986) 189–
194.
[20] M.A. Raymond, E.R. Smith, J. Liesegang, The physical properties of blood—forensic
considerations, Sci. Justice 36 (1996) 153–160.
[21] M.A. Raymond, E.R. Smith, J. Liesegang, Oscillating blood droplets—implications
for crime scene reconstruction, Sci. Justice 36 (1996) 161–171.
[22] R.R. Risenbatt, R.C. Shaler, A bloodstain pattern interpretation in a homicide case
involving an apparent ‘‘stomping’’, J. Forensic Sci. 40 (1995) 139–145.
[23] W.F. Rowe, Errors in the determination of the point of origin of bloodstains,
Forensic Sci. Int. 191 (2006) 47–51.
[24] B.G. Stephens, T.B. Allen, Back spatter of blood from gunshot wounds—observa-
tions and experimental simulation, J. Forensic Sci. 28 (1983) 437–439.
[25] B. White, Bloodstain patterns on fabrics: the effect of drop volume, dropping
height and impact angle, Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. J. 19 (1986) 3–36.
[26] C. Willis, A.K. Piranian, J.R. Donaggio, R.J. Barnett, W.F. Rowe, Errors in the
estimation of the distance of fall and angles of impact blood drops, Forensic
Sci. Int. 123 (2001) 1–4.
[27] C. Wilson, S. Altschul, Bloodstain pattern analysis in a case of suicide with a
compound bow and arrow, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 25 (2004) 80–82.
[28] K. Yen, M. Thali, B. Kneubuehl, O. Peschel, U. Zollinger, R. Dirnhofer, Blood-spatter
patterns: hands hold clues for the forensic reconstruction of the sequence of
events, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 24 (2003) 132–140.
[29] R.A. Zweidinger, L.T. Lytle, C.G. Pitt, Photography of bloodstains visualized by
luminol, J. Forensic Sci. 18 (1973) 296–302.
B. Karger et al. / Forensic Science International 181 (2008) 15–20
20
