

--- PAGE 1 ---

An automated approach to the classiﬁcation of impact spatter
and cast-off bloodstain patterns
R.M. Arthura,b,*, J. Hoogenboomb, M. Baikerb, M.C. Taylorc, K.G. de Bruinb
a School of Chemical Sciences, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
b Netherlands Forensic Institute, P.O. Box 24044, The Hague, 2490 AA, Netherlands
c Institute of Environmental Science and Research Ltd (ESR), Christchurch Science Centre, P.O. Box 29-181, Christchurch 8041, New Zealand
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 23 September 2017
Received in revised form 26 April 2018
Accepted 13 May 2018
Available online 20 June 2018
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Features
Classiﬁcation
Feature extraction
Feature selection
Automation
A B S T R A C T
In the forensic discipline of bloodstain pattern analysis, it has been suggested that there is a blurred
boundary between characterising the features of a bloodstain pattern and determining the mechanism(s)
that led to its deposition. This study proposes that bloodstain pattern classiﬁcation can become a distinct
and logical process by implementing an automated approach. To do this, an automated bloodstain
pattern recognition system was developed to enable the distinction of two types of spatter bloodstain
patterns. First, global pattern features based on common bloodstain pattern properties were extracted
from laboratory-generated impact spatter and cast-off bloodstain patterns. Following this, automated
feature selection methods were used to identify the combination of features that best distinguished the
two bloodstain pattern types. This eventually led to the training and testing of a Fisher quadratic
discriminant classiﬁer using separate subsets of the generated bloodstain patterns. When applied to the
training dataset, a 100% classiﬁcation precision resulted. An independent dataset comprising of
bloodstain patterns generated on paint and wallpaper substrates were used to validate the performance
of the classiﬁer. An error rate of 2% was obtained when the classiﬁer was applied to these bloodstain
patterns. This automated bloodstain pattern recognition system offers considerable promise as an
objective classiﬁcation methodology which up to now, the discipline has lacked. With further reﬁnement,
including testing it over a wider range of bloodstain patterns, it could provide valuable quantitative data
to support analysts in their task of classifying bloodstain patterns.
© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Recognising patterns based on a sizeable body of knowledge
that has been stored in the human mind is regarded as a
prerequisite to human expert decision-making [1]. Humans
have developed sophisticated methods of sensing and inter-
preting patterns in the environment. Pattern recognition is
central to a number of forensic disciplines including bloodstain
pattern analysis (BPA). The recognition of bloodstain patterns
relies primarily on the identiﬁcation of the pattern’s diagnostic
properties and an evaluation of the possible mechanisms by
which the pattern was deposited. Together these form the
process bloodstain pattern analysts term pattern classiﬁcation.
The limitations of pattern classiﬁcation as currently practiced, are
the qualitative nature of determining the properties of the pattern
and the subjective judgement required to infer the pattern’s causal
event [2,3]. It is evident that this process encourages the formation
of early mechanistic conclusions about the cause of a pattern
before a full set of observations has been made [4]. This problem is
exacerbated by the use of standard discipline terminology [5],
which is largely mechanism-based. In fact, BPA taxonomies [6,7]
form the backbone of bloodstain pattern classiﬁcation. So the
boundary between observation and interpretation or reconstruc-
tion can become blurred [8]. A key reason for this and other
persisting issues, is the lack of a rigorous and standardised BPA
methodology [3,8]. Deﬁning a formal BPA methodology is the
subject of ongoing discussion among BPA practitioners [9–11].
Computers offer a wide range of capabilities that can both assist
and emulate human decision-making. Pattern recognition has
been deﬁned as the study of how computers observe the
environment, learn to distinguish patterns of interest and make
reasonable decisions about different categories of patterns [12].
Pattern recognition systems can be based on identifying the pre-
* Corresponding author at: The University of Auckland, School of Chemical
Sciences, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.
E-mail address: ravishkaa@gmail.com (R.M. Arthur).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.05.019
0379-0738/© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

deﬁned class1 to which an unknown pattern belongs or conversely,
classes can be learned based on similarities between patterns. The
design of a pattern recognition system generally consists of the
following stages: deﬁning pattern classes, data collection, selecting
the distinguishing features (referred to as feature selection),
specifying classiﬁcation algorithms and estimating the classiﬁca-
tion error [14].
Over the years, pattern recognition systems have evolved to
become valuable tools that are used to organise or retrieve vast
amounts of electronic data [15,16], develop computer-aided diagnosis
systems for the detection of disease [17–19] or to identify signature
characteristics of ﬂuids [20]. It has become evident, that forensic
disciplinesaremovingawayfrommanualmethodsofanalysistowards
more automated computer-based methods of pattern recognition.
Examples include the comparison of bullets [21], ﬁngerprints [22],
facial features [23], speech [24] and handwriting [25]. Indeed, certain
components of pattern recognition systems (e.g. pre-processing,
feature extraction and classiﬁcation) have beensuccessfullyemployed
in bloodstain pattern studies [2,26–30].
However, there does not yet appear to be a comprehensive
pattern recognition system designed to distinguish different types
of bloodstain patterns based on measurable pattern properties.
Therefore, the goal of the present study was to assess the viability
of developing an automated pattern recognition system capable of
distinguishing bloodstain patterns. To develop the proposed
system (see Fig. 1 for an overview), a laboratory-generated
reference pattern dataset, consisting of two commonly encoun-
tered bloodstain pattern types, was ﬁrst generated. This included
30 impact spatter2 and 30 cast off3 bloodstain patterns that were
speciﬁcally digitised for the study. An image-processing method-
ology was then used to extract features that were representative of
common 
bloodstain 
pattern 
properties 
[26]. 
Following 
the
identiﬁcation of the optimal set of features, a classiﬁer4 was
trained and tested with separate groups of patterns from the
reference pattern dataset. The performance of the classiﬁer was
ﬁnally evaluated with an independent dataset consisting of
bloodstain patterns that were created on a range of surfaces.
2. Methods
2.1. Generating a reference pattern dataset
2.1.1. Pattern creation
Human blood from one donor was used immediately upon
collection togeneratethebloodstainpatternsused inthisstudy.Atotal
of60bloodstainpatternsconsistingof30impactspatterand 30 cast-off
bloodstain patterns were created. As an attempt to represent the
variability expected of such patterns, different methods of pattern
creation were utilised. For the impact spatter patterns, a modiﬁed
mousetrap [31] was released onto a pool of 2 ml of blood.
Alternatively, a similar pool of blood was pipetted onto a wooden
block, in the centre of the striking area. A hammer was then used to
strike that pool of blood. Cast-off bloodstain patterns were created
by dipping various objects (ﬁnger, hammer and knife) in blood, and
swinging them in either an upwards or downwards direction. In
both sets of experiments, blood was deposited onto plain white ﬂat
walls that were made of Trespa (ﬂat panel based on thermosetting
resins; Jongeneel, Den Haag, The Netherlands). All bloodstain
patterns were left to dry for 2 hours prior to photography. A separate
collection of bloodstain patterns was also sourced (Table 1). These
patterns were termed the independent dataset and consisted of 22
impact spatterand 20 cast-off bloodstainpatterns that were created
on either a paint or wallpaper surface. The methods used to create
these patterns are reported in Laber et. al. [32].
2.1.2. Digitisation and stitching
A customised setup was built to enable the acquisition of high
resolution digital images of all bloodstain patterns that were
produced in this study (Fig. 2). This setup consisted of a height-
adjustable tripod which was secured to a sliding platform. The
platform was positioned perpendicular to the Trespa wall at a
distance of 210 cm and was able to slide horizontally across the ﬂoor
at measurable distances. With this setup, a large bloodstain pattern
(200  100 cm with adhesive scale rulers on all four sides of the
pattern) could be captured in the form of four RAW images with 40%
overlap. A Nikon 36.3 MP D810 camera with a Nikon AF-S 60 mm
macro lens was used to capture the patterns. After photography, the
4. Split dataset into training 
& test sets
5. Feature Selection 
6. Development of 
Classifier and Cross 
Validation
7. Re-train classifier on 
entire pattern dataset
8. Evaluate performance 
using an independent 
dataset
3. Feature Extraction
2. Data Import and Pre-
processing
(a) Training
(b) Testing
(c) Evaluate Error
1. Reference bloodstain 
pattern dataset generation
Fig. 1. An overview of the proposed automated bloodstain pattern recognition
system.
Table 1
Bloodstain patterns in an independent dataset created by Laber et al. [32].
Mechanism used to create the pattern
Substrate 
Impact 
Cast-off
Paint 
12 
11
Wallpaper 
10 
9
TOTAL 
22 
20
1 A class is deﬁned as a set of objects that are recognised as similar within a given
context. A class usually has a unique name (class name). The individual objects
within a class have a label that refers to this name (class label) [13].
2 A bloodstain pattern resulting from an object striking liquid blood [5].
3 A bloodstain pattern resulting from blood drops released from an object due to
its motion [5].
4 A classiﬁer is an algorithmic rule that assigns a class label to any object in a
particular object representation [13].
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319 
311


--- PAGE 3 ---

four RAW images corresponding to each of the individual 60
bloodstain patterns were combined using the digital stitching
process that is available on Adobe Photoshop CS5 v5.1 (Fig. 3). Green
circular markers were placed (prior to photography) inside
designated regions of overlap, forming landmarks that were used
to assist the digital stitching process. The latter process eventually
led to the production of single TIFF-format images with a resolution
of approximately 6.4 pix/mm as measured by ImageJ 1.48 v software
[33]. To be conservative, it was assumed that a minimum of 9 pixels
(3  3) was required to resolve an element. This corresponded to an
element of approximately 0.22 mm2 in area or a circular element of
approximately 0.5 mm diameter. The entire selection of stitched
patterns was termed the reference pattern dataset.
2.2. Classiﬁer development
2.2.1. Deﬁnitions
Terms used in this study follow those proposed by Ref. [26]. An
“element” was deﬁned as a contiguous group of pixels in a digitised
image of a bloodstained region. A “pattern” was designated as a
subset of elements that were considered to be related. Both
elements and patterns were regarded as having properties, for
example, shape, or size. The measurable part of a property was
termed a “feature”. Local features represented properties of
elements and global features represented properties of patterns.
2.2.2. Data import and pre-processing
The TIFF-format ﬁles that corresponded to the bloodstain
patterns in the reference pattern dataset were imported into
Matlab R2015b [34] using the built-in image reader, and then
individually pre-processed using the automated image-processing
methodology outlined in Ref. [26]. Each pattern was pre-processed
using 
the 
following 
steps: 
background 
subtraction, 
element
segmentation, morphological operations, labeling and measuring
elements, ellipse-ﬁtting and feature extraction.
2.2.3. Feature extraction
Feature extraction5 was deﬁned as the process of extracting
quantitative data representative of properties commonly found in
different bloodstain pattern types (e.g. distribution of element
shape).Inthisstudy, thesepropertieswere expressedasfeatures (see
Table 1 of the Supplementary Materials) which were extracted using
the image-processing methodology outlined in Ref. [26]. This
automated methodology provided an objective method of analysis
comparedtothetypicalvisualassessmentof thefeaturesofapattern,
by a BPA analyst. Feature extraction was performed on each
bloodstain pattern in the reference pattern dataset and eventually
led to values corresponding to 11 pattern metrics. A pattern metric
was considered to be an overall representation of a global feature in
an individual bloodstain pattern. These values were eventually
stored in a feature matrix (60 rows  11 columns) where each row of
the matrix (termed a feature vector) corresponded to a single
bloodstain pattern and each value in the row corresponded to a
pattern metric. In pattern recognition literature, the 11-dimension-
al space occupied bythese feature vectors is referred toas the feature
space [35]. The pattern metrics stored in the feature matrix were:
1. Standard deviation of the tail to body ratio
2. Mean width to length ratio (representing drop impact angle)
3. Mean area of element to area of convex hull ratio (referred to as
the ‘convex hull ratio’)
4. Mean perimeter of inscribed circle to perimeter of element
ratio (referred to as ‘inscribed circle ratio’)
5. Mean element area
6. Standard deviation of element intensity
7. Standard deviation of the gamma angle
8. Standard deviation of the orientation angle
9. Mean Euclidean distance of elliptical elements to a polynomial
curve
10. Circularity of the convex hull enclosing all elements of the
pattern
11. Element density (i.e. the total number of elements in the
pattern divided by the area of the convex hull)
2.2.4. PR dataset generation
Functions 
from 
the 
Matlab 
pattern 
recognition 
toolbox
(PRTools) 
[36] 
were 
used 
to 
build 
the 
bloodstain pattern
recognition system. Using this toolbox, a ‘PR dataset’ variable
was constructed. This variable type is deﬁned as a complete
representation of all the pattern data that has been stored
electronically. The PR dataset consisted of the data in the feature
matrix, the relevant class labels for each pattern (i.e. ‘Impact’ or
‘Cast-off’) and feature labels corresponding to the 11 features that
were extracted (i.e. ‘Tail to body ratio’, ‘Impact angle’, etc.).
2.2.5. Deﬁning prior probabilities
The probability P(v) that a bloodstain pattern belongs to a
particular class (v) is deﬁned as the class prior [13]. In the context of
this study, there was an equal probability that a bloodstain pattern in
the reference pattern dataset was an impact spatter or a cast-off
bloodstain pattern. On this basis, the class priors were set to 0.5.
2.2.6. Training and test datasets
A training dataset is a set of objects that can each be reliably
assigned to one class and forms the fundamental basis of building a
classiﬁer [13]. A test dataset is a set of objects that is only used to
test the performance of a classiﬁer, after the classiﬁer has been
trained. 24 impact spatter and 24 cast-off bloodstain patterns were
randomly selected to form the training dataset (80%)6 while the
remaining 12 bloodstain patterns formed the test dataset (20%).
Fig. 2. Camera setup on sliding platform in front of the Trespa wall where
bloodstain patterns were created.
5 In pattern recognition literature, the term ‘feature extraction’ can also be used
to describe algorithms that create new features based on transformations or
combinations of the original feature set [35].
6 The reference dataset was split according to ratios that are prescribed by the
Pareto Principle (80:20 ratio).
312 
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319


--- PAGE 4 ---

2.2.7. Feature selection and cross validation
Feature selection is deﬁned as a set of algorithms that outputs a
subset of features based on the input feature set. The aim of feature
selection is to determine those features that perform well under
the conditions imposed by a certain classiﬁcation system [37–39]
or to eliminate redundant features [40]. Identifying the ideal
feature set can be particularly important when there is a large
number of features to select from (e.g. in text classiﬁcation [15,41]).
In this study, sequential backward feature selection (BFS) and
sequential forward feature selection (FFS) were performed on the
training dataset. With these methods, a sequential search algorithm
either adds features (FFS) or removes features (BFS) from a
candidate subset, while a criterion function7 is evaluated by the
search algorithm in order to determine which combination of
features best discriminates the classes [42]. 5-fold cross valida-
tion8
was simultaneously performed with feature selection
producing estimates of the expected classiﬁcation error given
different combinations of features. In this study, the cross
validation error rates resulting from BFS and FFS were evaluated
and compared using three different criteria (sum of the estimated
Mahalanobis distance9, inter-intra distance10 and 1-nearest-neigh-
bour11). The sequential search algorithm and corresponding
criterion function producing the lowest error rate were eventually
used to identify the combination of features optimal for the
bloodstain pattern classiﬁcation task.
2.2.8. Building the classiﬁer
2.2.8.1. Linear discriminant analysis. 
This study was based on the
assumption that pattern classes can be distinguished by a
combination of distinctive properties. This led to the application
of a Fisher mapping [44] (also known as Linear Discriminant
Analysis; 
LDA) 
which 
assumes 
that 
classes 
are 
normally
distributed, and can be linearly separated by projecting all data
onto a linear discriminant subspace12. The aim of LDA is to deﬁne
an orthogonal projection to a line that maximises the distance
between the mean of each class while minimising the variance of
each class. In this way, such a projection leads to compact and well-
separated classes. LDA has been shown to be valuable in face
recognition applications [45,46] as it achieves a greater between-
class scatter when there are several classes, thereby simplifying
classiﬁcation [45]. Using such a method to increase the separation
between classes is of value to BPA because bloodstain patterns can
exhibit properties that are common to one or more classes.
2.2.8.2. Quadratic discriminant classiﬁer. 
A quadratic discriminant
classiﬁer (QDC) formed the basis of the bloodstain pattern
recognition system. A QDC assumes that each pattern class
follows 
a 
normal 
distribution 
and 
establishes 
a 
decision
boundary that maximises the Mahalanobis distance between
each class mean. Classiﬁcation is thus performed by measuring the
Mahalanobis distance of an input pattern to the mean of each class
[47]. The input pattern is then assigned a class label based on the
shortest Mahalanobis distance to a particular class mean. In order
to implement this classiﬁer, the Fisher mapping and QDC classiﬁer
were combined and trained together with the training dataset.
Following this, the trained Fisher QDC was tested with the test
dataset. The original class labels were obtained for both training
and test datasets and compared with the predicted class labels
produced for each dataset. The estimated classiﬁcation error of the
Fisher QDC classiﬁer is reported where relevant.
2.2.8.3. 
Evaluation 
of 
classiﬁer 
performance. 
The Fisher QDC
classiﬁer was ﬁnally trained on the entire reference pattern dataset
(i.e.atotal of 60patterns)resultingin afullytrainedFisherQDC (herein
referredtoasthetrainedclassiﬁer). To evaluatethe performance of the
trained classiﬁer on bloodstain patterns that were not used in its
Fig. 3. Example of a stitched impact spatter pattern (left) and a stitched cast-off pattern (right) from the reference pattern dataset. Green circular markers act as landmarks for
stitching. Adhesive scale rulers surround the outer extremities of each pattern.
7 A criterion function J(X) evaluates the goodness of a subset of features based on
the ability of a classiﬁer to discriminate the classes in the feature space represented
by this feature set. A larger value of J indicates a better feature subset [42].
8 Cross validation functions by randomly splitting the training dataset into ﬁve
folds, and then repeatedly testing the performance of the prospective classiﬁer on
each fold when trained on the data in the other four folds [43].
9 The sum of the estimated Mahalanobis distance criterion function is the sum of
the distance between a set of points and a distribution. It measures the separation of
two groups of objects.
10 The 
inter-intra 
distance 
criterion 
function 
[39] 
with 
k = number 
of
features:W ¼ ðC1þC2Þ
2
J ¼ tr W1  COV m
ð 
Þ
 

Where: 
C1
and 
C2
is 
the 
k-by-k
covariance matrix of class 1 and 2 respectively; W is the combined within-
class scatter matrix (also k-by-k); m is a 2-by-k matrix of feature means (one
row for either class, one column for each feature); COV( . . . ) stands for
'covariance matrix of 
. . . ’; tr( . . . ) for the trace function (that is summing
the elements on the diagonal of a matrix) and J is the resulting inter-intra
distance value.
11 The 1-nearest-neighbour criterion function involves classifying each data point
(in the training data) by assigning it to the true class of its closest neighbour and
then checking how many classiﬁcation errors have been made.
12 Variances among groups are assumed to be the same. (i.e. homogeneity of
covariance).
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319 
313


--- PAGE 5 ---

development, the independent dataset (Table 1) was used as an input
to the trained Fisher QDC. For each pattern in the independent
dataset, feature extraction was conducted, resulting in data that
were stored in a feature matrix. The trained classiﬁer was then used
to predict the class labels corresponding to each bloodstain pattern
in the independent dataset. The resulting classiﬁcation precision
and posterior probabilities were calculated.
3. Results
3.1. Feature extraction
Values corresponding to each of the 11 pattern metrics were
obtained. The range of values observed for each feature and pattern
type is shown in Table 2 of the Supplementary Materials.
3.2. Feature selection
Forward (FFS) and Backward (BFS) feature selection was
conducted with cross validation in order to identify the optimal
feature set and estimate the classiﬁcation error that could arise
from different combinations of features. Error rates were assessed
with three different criteria. Fig. 4 with Table 2 shows the cross
validation error rates that were obtained after features were
sequentially added after each iteration (FFS). These results were
similar to those obtained with BFS. Overall, BFS and FFS showed
that the optimum number of features was between 4 and 5. On the
basis of these results, ﬁve features were chosen for the classiﬁer.
These features were mean area, circularity of the convex hull, mean
inscribed circle ratio, mean convex hull ratio and mean Euclidean
distance. Scatter plots showing the mean area plotted against each
of the remaining four features are shown in Figs. 5–8. Note that the
training and test datasets used after feature selection comprised
only of values corresponding to these ﬁve features.
3.3. Building a classiﬁer
3.3.1. Linear discriminant analysis
A Fisher mapping was applied to the training dataset resulting
in the projection of these data onto a line (Fig. 9). It is evident that a
linear combination of features enabled the separation of the two
spatter pattern classes.
3.3.2. Quadratic discriminant classiﬁer (QDC)
The trained Fisher QDC established a decision boundary
(Fig. 10), indicating the position of separation between the impact
spatter and cast-off bloodstain pattern classes. When the test
dataset was tested by the Fisher QDC, the results demonstrated
that the Fisher QDC could accurately predict all of the class labels
corresponding to each bloodstain pattern. The position of the
decision boundary, however, highlighted a region of overlap
between both peaks (Fig.10) suggesting the potential for erroneous
classiﬁcation.
3.3.3. Evaluation of classiﬁer performance
The trained classiﬁer accurately predicted the class labels of 23
bloodstain patterns in the independent dataset which were
deposited on a smooth painted surface and 17 bloodstain patterns
deposited on a wallpaper surface. One cast-off bloodstain
pattern deposited on wallpaper was erroneously classiﬁed,
representing an overall error rate of 2%. The remaining cast-off
bloodstain pattern (Cast-off Test 12) had insufﬁcient elements for
which all features could be measured and was therefore unable to
be automatically classiﬁed. The predicted class labels and
posterior probabilities that were generated for each pattern in
the independent dataset are given in Table 3 of the Supplemen-
tary Materials.
4. Discussion
Sequential feature selection and linear discriminant analysis
demonstrated 
that 
ﬁve pattern 
features were 
sufﬁcient 
to
distinguish the impact spatter and cast-off patterns in the reference
pattern dataset in this study. Of these features, mean element area
was the most effective. Impact spatter patterns often exhibit a high
proportion of small elements resulting from the production of very
small droplets as contact is made between the impacting object
and a blood pool. In this study, this could have been accentuated by
the nature of the ﬂat surfaces of the mouse trap used to create the
spatter.
Fig. 4. Cross validation with forward feature selection using three different criteria. Each successive feature is selected by maximising the criterion (J) (red circle = sum of the
estimated Mahalanobis distance, blue star = Inter-intra distance, green cross = Nearest neighbour distance). (For interpretation of the references to colour in the text, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
314 
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319


--- PAGE 6 ---

The remaining four diagnostic features that emerged were
circularity of the convex hull of the pattern, mean Euclidean
distance, mean element convex hull ratio and mean element
inscribed circle ratio. These features added some additional
discriminating value to the classiﬁer.
The circularity of the convex hull is a measure of the overall
distribution of elements in a pattern. The circularity of the convex
hull for the cast-off patterns in the reference pattern dataset was
generally lower than that of the impact patterns (Fig. 5). This
reﬂects the fact that elements in cast-off patterns tend to be
Table 2
Features sequentially added (FFS) with the Mahalanobis distance, Inter-intra distance and Nearest-neighbour distance criteria.
Criterion: 1)Mahalanobis distance 2) Inter-intra distance 
Criterion: 3) 1-Nearest neighbour distance
Number of features 
Feature added 
Number of features 
Feature added
1 
Area 
1 
Area
2 
Circularity of the convex hull 
2 
Tail to body ratio
3 
Inscribed circle ratio 
3 
Intensity
4 
Convex hull ratio 
4 
Width to length ratio
5 
Mean Euclidean distance 
5 
Convex hull ratio
6 
Tail to body ratio 
6 
Inscribed circle ratio
7 
Intensity 
7 
Orientation
8 
Density 
8 
Density
9 
Gamma angle 
9 
Circularity of the convex hull
10 
Orientation 
10 
Gamma angle
11 
Width to length ratio 
11 
Mean Euclidean distance
Fig. 5. Mean element area versus circularity of the convex hull.
Fig. 6. Mean element area versus mean inscribed circle ratio.
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319 
315


--- PAGE 7 ---

distributed in an elongated manner compared to a more circular
distribution of elements that are radially-dispersed in impact
patterns (Fig. 11). Because of the high variability in the manner in
which impact patterns can be created, more work is required to see
if this feature proves diagnostically useful over a wider range of
impact mechanisms. Much will depend on whether the entire
extent of the pattern can be visualised and captured.
The overall shape of a bloodstain pattern was also measured by
the mean Euclidean distance of elliptical elements to a least-squares
ﬁtted polynomial curve. This feature was based on the tendency in
some patterns for elements to be distributed in a straight or curved
line. For the impact patterns in the reference pattern dataset, the
mean Euclidean distance was generally higher than that of the cast-
off patterns (Fig. 8). This suggests that elliptical elements in impact
spatter patterns tend to be distributed further away from a ﬁtted
polynomial curve than in cast-off patterns. This is consistent with
current classiﬁcation methods which recognise that in cast-off
events, individual blood droplets are ejected over time and at various
points along the trajectory of the object being swung. This tends to
lead to a linear or curvilinear distribution of elements [6]. In the case
of impact spatter patterns, however, elements tend to be more
widely dispersed, with elliptical elements generally located at the
periphery of the pattern [6].
The element convex hull ratio is a measure of the regularity of the
element boundary or margin. For elements with smooth boundaries,
this ratio is expected to be close to 1. For the impact patterns in the
reference pattern dataset, this ratio was generally lower than for the
Fig. 7. Mean element area versus mean convex hull ratio.
Fig. 8. Mean element area versus mean Euclidean distance.
Fig. 9. Mapping of the training dataset to a linear discriminant subspace showing
that cast-off (blue crosses) and impact spatter (red stars) patterns could be
separated into classes. (For interpretation of the references to colour in the text, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
316 
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319


--- PAGE 8 ---

cast-off patterns (Fig. 7), reﬂecting the fact that the elements in the
impact patterns had margins that were on average moreirregularthan
those of cast-off patterns. Impact events typically produce an array of
liquid sheets and ligaments and other amorphous shaped volumes of
liquid, many of which eventually equilibrate into spherical drops.
Depending on their progress towards equilibrium, these volumes of
liquid can form irregularly-shaped elements. Furthermore, because
drops can arrive at the target surface over a period of time, there is the
potential for one drop to land on another, causing micro-splashing and
theformationofanelementwithalessregularmargin.Theproduction
of cast-off drops is typically more uniform with drops forming at
regular intervals from the break-up of ligament strands. This may
account for the presence of elements with more regular margins.
The element inscribed circle ratio is a measure of the circularity
of an element and a secondary measure of the regularity of the
element margin. This measure compares the shape of the body of
an element to a circle that is ﬁtted within the boundaries of that
element. Values closer to one indicate that elements are nearly
circular in shape. For the impact patterns in this study, this ratio
was generally higher than for the cast-off patterns (Fig. 6). Impact
patterns often feature a large number of small near-circular
elements in proximity to the location of the impact and these were
evident in many of the impact patterns in this study (Fig. 12). The
Cast-off
Impact
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
LDA Projection
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Density
Decision 
boundary of 
Fisher QDC
Region of 
Overlap
Cast-off
Impact
Fig. 10. Fisher mapping with quadratic classiﬁcation of the training dataset (cast-off = blue crosses, impact spatter = red stars). Decision boundary of Fisher QDC shown
(dotted line) and region of overlap between classes (yellow rectangle). (For interpretation of the references to colour in the text, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)
Fig. 11. The convex hull of cast-off pattern 16 (circularity = 0.4) and impact pattern 29 (circularity = 0.8).
Fig. 12. Presence of near circular elements in an impact spatter pattern from the
reference pattern dataset.
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319 
317


--- PAGE 9 ---

presence of these elements may account for the differences in
mean element inscribed circle ratio observed for these two pattern
types.
The trained classiﬁer misclassiﬁed one of the cast-off blood-
stain patterns in the independent pattern dataset (Fig. 1 of the
Supplementary Materials). A closer look at this pattern and its
corresponding properties provides some useful insights (Table 3).
The misclassiﬁcation of this pattern appears to be primarily the
result of the mean element area. This was lower (<2 mm2) than
those of all the cast-off patterns in the reference pattern dataset
but within the range exhibited by the impact patterns. This is likely
to be the result of differences in the method used to create these
cast-off patterns.
Pattern linearity is a major diagnostic feature used by
bloodstain pattern analysts to identify cast-off bloodstain patterns.
However the inﬂuence of the mean Euclidean distance metric on
the classiﬁcation of the pattern was apparently insufﬁcient to lead
to a correct classiﬁcation. Other measures of linearity may need to
be found to improve the performance of the classiﬁer in identifying
cast-off patterns.
The reference pattern dataset in this study only contained a
small sample of bloodstain patterns and featured a limited range of
methods used to create the patterns. The classiﬁer was trained on
bloodstain patterns captured on a smooth Trespa wall surface. It is
likely that classiﬁcation accuracy will improve given a reference
pattern dataset with patterns deposited on a wider range of surface
types. Features such as element convex hull ratio and inscribed
circle ratio may be among those sensitive to substrate character-
istics.
5. Conclusion
The automated classiﬁer developed in this study demonstrates
the viability of a quantitative methodology for bloodstain pattern
classiﬁcation. The ﬁndings showed that the combination of a small
number of measurable features was capable of distinguishing two
pattern types with a high level of accuracy.
In addition to the improved objectivity such a method could
bring, it is likely that human factors such as contextual bias, that
are known to affect BPA analyses, could be mitigated.
With the development of suitable imaging techniques, the
classiﬁer has the potential to be used at a crime scene to provide a
trained analyst with objective pattern data to complement his/her
expert judgement. For example, objective measures of pattern
characteristics such as element size, shape and distribution could
be obtained and presented in discriminating combinations. Data to
help analysts take decisions regarding the need for further analysis
(e.g. estimating the region of origin13 if an impact spatter pattern is
suspected) should also be forthcoming.
To be useful for bloodstain pattern analysts, however, the study
needs to be extended to a wider range of bloodstain pattern types
created in a variety of ways on different surfaces and presented in
three dimensions. A wider pool of features may be required to
achieve success in discriminating other patterns, particularly those
that are known to share pattern characteristics.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to extent their gratitude to Linda van de
Merwe for creating and digitising the bloodstain patterns used in
this 
study and 
to Hannes 
Habraken 
(Netherlands 
Forensic
Institute) for supporting the development of the experimental
setup. The authors gratefully acknowledge the advice and support
that was offered by Dr. ir. Titia Sijen (Netherlands Forensic
Institute). This work was supported by the Netherlands Forensic
Institute and the Institute of Environmental Science and Research
(ESR), New Zealand. This work was also carried out as part of
doctoral research through The University of Auckland, New
Zealand.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.05.019.
References
[1] J. Larkin, J. Mcdermott, D.P. Simon, H.A. Simon, Expert and novice performance
in solving physics problems, Science 208 (4450) (1980) 1335–1342.
[2] Y. Cho, F. Springer, F. Tulleners, W. Ristenpart, Quantitative bloodstain pattern
analysis: differentiation of contact transfer patterns versus spatter patterns on
fabric via microscopic inspection, Forensic Sci. Int. 249 (2015) 233–240.
[3] R.M. Arthur, S.L. Cockerton, K.G. de Bruin, M.C. Taylor, A novel element-based
approach for the objective classiﬁcation of bloodstain patterns, Forensic Sci.
Int. 257 (2015) 220–228.
[4] E. Bernstein, Science in bloodstain pattern analysis, Int. Assoc. Bloodstain
Pattern Anal. News (2005) 16–19.
[5] SWGSTAIN, 
Scientiﬁc 
working 
group 
on 
bloodstain 
pattern 
analysis:
recommended terminology, Forensic Sci. Commun. 11 (2009).
[6] T. Bevel, R.M. Gardner, Bloodstain Pattern Analysis with an Introduction to
Crime Scene Reconstruction, CRC Press, Boca Raton: FL, USA, 2008.
[7] S. James, P. Kish, P. Sutton, Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Theory
and Practice, Taylor & Francis Group, Florida, 2005.
[8] M.C. Taylor, T.L. Laber, P.E. Kish, G. Owens, N.K. Osborne, The reliability of
pattern classiﬁcation in bloodstain pattern analysis, Part 1: bloodstain
patterns on rigid non-absorbent surfaces, J. Forensic Sci. 61 (4) (2016) 922–
927, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.13091.
[9] R. Gardner, Deﬁning a methodology for bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic
Identif. 56 (4) (2005) 549–556.
[10] J. Saviano, Articulating a concise scientiﬁc methodology for bloodstain pattern
analysis, J. Forensic Identif. 55 (4) (2005) 461–470.
[11] H. Latham, Using and articulating the scientiﬁc method in bloodstain pattern
analysis, J. Forensic Identif. 61 (5) (2011) 487–494.
[12] A.K. Jain, R.P.W. Duin, J. Mao, Statistical pattern recognition: a review, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22 (1) (2000) 4–37.
[13] R.P.W. Duin, E. Pekalska. Pattern Recognition: Introduction and Terminology.
Available at http://37steps.com/.
[14] S. Raudys, A.K. Jain, Small sample size effects in statistical pattern recognition:
recommendations for practitioners, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 13
(3) (1991) 252–264.
[15] A.K. Uysal, An improved global feature selection scheme for text classiﬁcation,
Expert Syst. Appl. 43 (2016) 82–92.
[16] S. Antani, R. Kasturi, R. Jain, A survey on the use of pattern recognition methods
for abstraction: indexing and retrieval of images and video, Pattern Recognit.
35 (2002) 945–965.
[17] Y. Yu, L. Guan, A CAD system for the automatic detection of clustered
microcalciﬁcations in digitized mammogram ﬁlms, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging
19 (2) (2000) 115–126.
[18] M.N. Gurcan, L. Boucheron, A. Can, A. Madabhushi, N. Rajpoot, B. Yener,
Histopathological image analysis: a review, IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2 (2009)
147–171.
[19] A.S. Constantinidis, M.C. Fairhurst, A.F.R. Rahman, A new multi-expert decision
combination algorithm and its application to the detection of circumscribed
masses in digital mammograms, Pattern Recognit. 34 (2001) 1527–1537.
[20] N. Kim, Z. Li, C. Hurth, F. Zenhausern, S. Chang, D. Attinger, Identiﬁcation of
ﬂuid and substrate chemistry based on automatic pattern recognition of
stains, Anal. Methods 4 (50) (2012) 50–57.
Table 3
Values of the ﬁve selected features for the erroneously classiﬁed cast-off bloodstain patterns in the reference pattern dataset.
Erroneous pattern ID 
Mean area (mm2) 
Circularity of the convex hull 
Mean inscribed circle ratio 
Mean convex hull ratio 
Mean Euclidean distance (mm)
Cast-off Test 11 
1.95 
0.0651 
0.649 
0.485 
0.000007
13 The three-dimensional location from which spatter originated [6].
318 
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319


--- PAGE 10 ---

[21] F.P. Leon, Automated comparison of ﬁrearm bullets, Forensic Sci. Int. 156
(2006) 40–50.
[22] A.K. Jain, A. Ross, S. Prabhakar, An introduction to biometric recognition, IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 14 (1) (2004) 4–19.
[23] W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P.J. Phillips, A. Rosenfeld, Face recognition: a literature
survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 35 (4) (2003) 399–458.
[24] M. El Ayadi, M.S. Kamel, F. Karray, Survey on speech emotion recognition:
features, classiﬁcation schemes and databases, Pattern Recognit. 44 (2011)
572–587.
[25] R. Plamondon, S. Srihari, On-line and off-line handwriting recognition: a
comprehensive survey, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22 (1) (2000)
63–84.
[26] R.M. Arthur, M. Baiker, P.J. Humburg, J. Hoogenboom, M.C. Taylor, K.G. de Bruin,
An image-processing methodology for extracting bloodstain pattern features,
Forensic Sci. Int. 277 (2017) 122–132.
[27] W. Ristenpart, F. Tulleners, S. Siu, J. Saiﬁ, F. Springer, Quantitative Analysis of
High Velocity Bloodstain Patterns. U. S. Department of Justice Grant Report,
(2013) .
[28] S. Siu, J. Pender, F. Springer, F. Tulleners, W. Ristenpart, Quantitative
differentiation of bloodstain patterns resulting from gunshot and blunt force
impacts, J. Forensic Sci. 62 (5) (2017) 1166–1179, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
1556-4029.13418.
[29] S.L. Chen, C. Yang, C. Zhu, X.C. Yin, Bloody image classiﬁcation with global and
local features, in: T. Tan, X. Li, X. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Yang, H. Cheng (Eds.), Pattern
Recognition. CCPR 2016. Communications in Computer and Information
Science, vol. 663, Springer, Singapore, 2016.
[30] N. Shoumy, P. Ehkan, S. Yaakob, S. Ali, S. Khatun, Feature extraction for neural
network pattern recognition for bloodstain analysis, Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 11
(15) (2016) 8583–8589.
[31] K.G. de Bruin, R. Stoel, J.C.M. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin
determination in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (6) (2011), doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.01841.x.
[32] T. Laber, P. Kish, M. Taylor, G. Owens, N. Osborne, J. Curran, Reliability
Assessment of Current Methods in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis. U. S.
Department of Justice Grant Report, (2014) .
[33] ImageJ, Public domain, http://imagej.nih.gov/ij. (Accessed 26 September
2014).
[34] Mathworks, Natick, USA. https://nl.mathworks.com/. (Accessed 26 September
2014).
[35] T. Breckon, C. Solomon, Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing — A Practical
Approach with Examples in Matlab, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., U.S.A, 2011.
[36] R.P.W. Duin, P. Juszczak, P. Paclik, E. Pekalska, D. de Ridder, D.M.J. Tax, S.
Verzakov, PRTools 4.1, A Matlab Toolbox for Pattern Recognition, Delft
University of Technology, 2007.
[37] A. Jain, D. Zongker, Feature Selection: evaluation, application and small sample
performance, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 19 (2) (1997) 153–158.
[38] R. Kohavi, George John, Wrappers for feature subset selection, Artif. Intell. 97
(1997) 273–324.
[39] A.L. Blum, P. Langley, Selection of relevant features for examples in machine
learning, Artif. Intell. 97 (1997) 245–271.
[40] L. Yu, H. Liu, Efﬁcient feature selection via analysis of relevance and
redundancy, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 5 (2004) 1205–1224.
[41] Y. Yang, J.O. Pedersen, A comparative study on feature selection in text
categorization, July, ICML ‘97 Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning, 971997, pp. 412–420.
[42] M. Kudo, J. Sklansky, Comparison of algorithms that select features for pattern
classiﬁers, Pattern Recognit. 33 (2000) 25–41.
[43] R. Kohavi, A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation
and model selection, Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. 14 (2) (1995) 1137–1145.
[44] R.A. Fisher, The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems, Ann.
Eugen. 7 (1936) 179–188.
[45] P.N. Belhumeur, J.P. Hespanha, D.J. Kriegman, Eigenfaces vs Fisherfaces:
recognition using class speciﬁc linear projection, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 19 (7) (1997) 711–720.
[46] D.L. Swets, J. Weng, Using discriminant eigenfeatures for image retrieval, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 18 (8) (1996) 831–836.
[47] S. Mika, G. Ratsch, J. Weston, B. Scholkopf, K.R. Muller, Fisher discriminant
analysis with kernels, Proceedings, IEEE Workshop on Neural Networks for
Signal Processing (1999).
R.M. Arthur et al. / Forensic Science International 289 (2018) 310–319 
319
