

--- PAGE 1 ---

Quantitative bloodstain analysis: Differentiation of contact transfer
patterns versus spatter patterns on fabric via microscopic inspection
Yuen Cho a, Faye Springer b, Frederic A. Tulleners a, William D. Ristenpart a,c,*
a Forensic Science Graduate Group, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
b Sacramento County Laboratory of Forensic Science, Sacramento, CA 95820, USA
c Department of Chemical Engineering & Materials Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
1. Introduction
A correct distinction between bloodstain patterns formed by
‘‘contact transfer’’ and ‘‘spatter’’ can be essential for the accurate
reconstruction of events at crime scene where such bloodstain
patterns are found. The Scientiﬁc Working Group on Bloodstain
Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN) deﬁnes a transfer stain as ‘‘a
bloodstain resulting from contact between a blood-bearing surface
and another surface’’, whereas spatter stain is deﬁned as ‘‘a
bloodstain resulting from a blood drop dispersed through the air
due to an external force applied to a source of liquid blood’’ [1].
Although these deﬁnitions are clear, the differentiation between
them is challenging, especially when the bloodstain is on fabric. As
currently practiced, the interpretations of bloodstain patterns by
bloodstain pattern analysts are mostly based upon the experience
level of the analysts and the qualitative characteristics of the
bloodstain patterns. Because of the analysts’ subjective analysis of
bloodstain patterns found at the crime scene, however, experts
often provide different interpretations of the same bloodstain
pattern evidence. For example, in Indiana v. Camm [2] the state
called four expert witnesses, all of whom testiﬁed that some of the
bloodstains on the defendant’s shirt were the result of high-
velocity impact spatter. In contrast, the defense called their own
four bloodstain analysis expert witnesses, and these four experts
testiﬁed that all of the bloodstains on the defendant’s shirt resulted
from contact transfer. A similar example occurred in the Supreme
Court of California case People v. McWhorter [3], in which the
experts called upon to testify by the prosecution and defense had
different interpretations of the bloodstains found on a paper towel
collected at the crime scene: the defense expert said the stains
were ‘‘expectorated’’ (nasal blowing pattern) whereas the prose-
cutor’s criminalist said the bloodstains were transfer stains.
Summing matters up, the National Research Council stated in
their recent report that the interpretations of bloodstain pattern
analysts ‘‘are more subjective than scientiﬁc’’ [4].
A key reason for the subjectivity is the lack of quantitative
methods for characterizing bloodstains on fabrics. Arguably the
Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 28 August 2014
Received in revised form 15 January 2015
Accepted 23 January 2015
Available online 4 February 2015
Keywords:
Stockinette
BPA
Textiles
Cotton
Polyester
Drops
A B S T R A C T
In crime scene reconstruction, it is often necessary to differentiate ‘‘contact transfer’’ and ‘‘spatter’’
bloodstain patterns found on clothing. Current methodologies, however, are qualitative and prone to
context bias. In this work, we demonstrate that microscopic inspection of the stain orientations provides
a quantitative differentiation of bloodstains resulting from spatter versus contact transfer. Speciﬁcally,
common knitted fabrics are comprised of parallel rows of left loop legs, in an upward diagonal orientation
(/), and right loop legs in a downward diagonal orientation (\). Our microscopic examination of more than
65,000 individual stained loop legs shows that spatter stains are approximately evenly distributed
between left and right loop legs, but contact transfer stains are unevenly distributed: depending on the
type of surface contacted, as many as 82% of the stains were preferentially located on the left loop legs. We
further show that in these fabrics the left loop legs protrude further out than the right loop legs by
approximately 50 mm, indicating that the observation of left loop legs preferentially stained over right
loop legs is associated with the topography of the fabric. These ﬁndings suggest that microscopic
quantiﬁcation of the relative loop leg stain distributions could provide an objective means of
differentiating contact transfer versus spatter patterns in crime scene reconstruction.
 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author at: Department of Chemical Engineering & Materials
Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA. Tel.: +1 530 752 8780.
E-mail address: wdristenpart@ucdavis.edu (W.D. Ristenpart).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/fo r sc iin t
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2015.01.021
0379-0738/ 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 2 ---

most well-known quantitative methodology in bloodstain pattern
analysis is the determination of point-of-origin via triangulation
(cf. Refs. [5,6]), a methodology which depends on understanding
the complicated physics of drops in ﬂight [7]. This approach does
not help, however, in the differentiation of spatter versus contact
transfer on fabrics. Previous research speciﬁcally on bloodstains
located on fabrics has focused primarily on individual drops
impacting various types of fabrics at different angles and velocities.
Karger et al. investigated and characterized the differences
between contact and ‘‘dynamic’’ (spatter) stains on three common
types of fabric [8]. They found that individual millimeter scale
dynamic stains tended to: (i) be more symmetric, (ii) yield more
‘secondary droplets’ (presumably from splashing), and (iii) appear
darker overall because they tended to lie closer to the fabric
surface. In contrast, individual millimeter scale contact transfer
stains tended to be asymmetric, lack secondary droplets, and were
paler in color. Although Karger’s observations provide approximate
guidelines for distinguishing contact transfer and dynamic stains,
the guidelines are qualitative: for example, different experts can
argue about how ‘‘symmetric’’ a stain appears. More recently,
Holbrook examined bloodstains on a wider range of fabrics and
found that certain fabric characteristics, such as composition and
absorbency, appear to be factors for the appearance of bloodstains
on clothing materials [9]. This work also suggested that the shape
of the stains appeared to be associated with their overall size.
Stains that were smaller than the width of a single thread tended to
retain highly circular shapes, whereas stains that were wide
enough to cover multiple threads were more distorted. Again,
however, these characterizations are qualitative and thus subject
to debate amongst analysts. Clearly, quantitative characteristics
that can serve as objective guidelines for differentiating spatter
stains and transfer stains are needed.
The objective of this study is to develop a quantitative
methodology 
to 
differentiate 
contact 
transfer 
from 
spatter
bloodstain patterns on the face side of common knitted fabrics.
We focus here on microscopic examination of bloodstains on the
‘‘stockinette’’ knitting pattern, which is ubiquitous in modern mass
produced clothing (e.g., T-shirts, polo shirts, etc.) Stockinette
patterns involve stitch loops of yarn repeated throughout the fabric
[10]; each loop contains a loop head, two loop legs and the loop feet
(Fig. 1a). Importantly, on the face side (i.e., on the side of the fabric
typically worn away from the body) the loop legs are apparent as
parallel rows of alternate opposing orientations, upward diagonal
(/) and downward diagonal (\), cf. Fig. 1b. The key ﬁnding in this
work is that blood preferentially absorbs into the upward diagonal
(left) loop legs during contact transfer, whereas spatter is more evenly
distributed between the two orientations. We further show via
confocal microscopy that the upward diagonal (left) loop legs
protrude further outward by about 50 mm compared to the
downward diagonal (right) loop legs, indicating that the fabric
topography determines the preferential absorption during contact
transfer. The results point toward an objective and quantitative
means of differentiating contact transfer and spatter on fabrics that
contain similar topographical asymmetries.
2. Study design and methodology
2.1. Materials and methods
Porcine (pig) blood, obtained from freshly killed pigs at the
Animal Science meat lab on the UC Davis campus, was used for all
experiments in this study. Standard BD EDTA tubes (ethylenedia-
minetetraacetic acid) were used as anticoagulant containers. The
blood samples were stored in a refrigerator at 4 8C shortly after
collection from the pigs.
All blood was used within 1–5 days from collection date. Prior
to an experiment, the blood samples were warmed up to human
body temperature (37 8C) in a circulating water bath for 30–
45 min. The blood was then transferred to a pre-warmed atomizer
(a standard perfume bottle) and left in the water bath for another
15–20 min until the experiments were performed. The tempera-
ture of the water bath was monitored to ensure the temperature
was kept constant throughout the experiments.
The fabrics were purchased from a local clothing store as white
T-shirts. Two fabric materials were tested: 100% cotton and 50%
cotton/50% polyester. White fabrics were chosen to simplify
visualization of the blood. The stockinette weaving of the two
fabrics was veriﬁed via microscopic examination to follow the
same pattern.
The fabrics were stained with the blood in two distinct manners
(Fig. 2). For the ‘‘spatter’’ patterns (Fig. 2a each stain pattern was
formed by a single spray of the atomizer directly onto the fabric.
The atomizer was held approximately 10 cm above from the fabric
surface, which was placed horizontally on a bench surface in lab.
Ten replicates of this procedure were performed with both types of
fabric (20 trials in total).
In contrast, the contact transfer bloodstain patterns were
generated by ﬁrst spraying the blood onto a ‘‘donor’’ surface
(Fig. 2b). The blood was sprayed from the atomizer in an identical
fashion as in the spatter replicates (10 cm above the horizontal
donor surface). Two types of donor surfaces were tested: leather, to
represent a more pliable surface comparable to human skin, and
glass, to represent a rigid and smooth surface. Immediately after
spraying the blood onto the donor surface, the fabric of interest
was then pressed by hand onto the donor surface to transfer the
blood via direct contact. Similarly, we performed 10 replicates of
Fig. 1. (a) A schematic diagram in the Stockinette knitting pattern, as viewed from the face side of the fabric. Note that loop legs sit above the neighboring stitch, and that each
row appears as a series of alternating loop leg with opposing orientation. Reproduced from reference [10]. (b) Photograph of the face side of 100% cotton plain fabric. Note that
only the loop legs, of left or right orientation, are clearly visible. Red dashed lines are superimposed to guide the eye. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240
234


--- PAGE 3 ---

transfer patterns generated from each surface type for each type of
fabric, yielding an additional 40 trials.
2.2. Digital photography and microscopy
After each experiment, all pieces of fabric were allowed to air
dry completely before proceeding to photography. A CANNON EOS
7D 18.0 Megapixel digital SLR camera along with four large ﬂood
lights (to provide even illumination) attached to a copy stand were
used to capture low magniﬁcation digital images of the overall
pattern on the fabric.
Microscopic images of randomly selected areas of each pattern
were taken by reﬂection microscope (Leica DM 2500 M micro-
system) at 10 magniﬁcation. The presence or absence of blood was
easily discernible because of the high contrast with the white fabric.
A minimum of 20 microscopic images was acquired for each trial
replicate. For both types of fabric, there were 10 replicates of spatter
patterns, and 10 replicates of transfer patterns generated from both
leather and glass respectively, yielding 2  3  10  20 = 1200
microscopic images.
Each microscopic image was analyzed by manually counting
the number of stained left loop legs and the number of stained right
loop legs. A loop leg that had approximately 75% or more of its
visible surface area stained with blood was counted as one stained
loop leg. Smaller specks of blood and partially coated loop legs
(i.e., with less than 75% coverage) were ignored. We emphasize
that this deﬁnition was arbitrary, i.e., one could choose a different
threshold, and that different analysts might perceive the same loop
leg to be more or less than 75% covered. To test whether analyst-to-
analyst variation was signiﬁcant, we chose a representative set of
18 images at random and had ﬁve additional forensic science
students count the number of stained loop legs in each image. The
details are presented in the supplementary material, but the
main ﬁnding was that student analysts with de minimis training
obtained agreement on their stained loop leg counts on average to
within 5.7%. As discussed below this variability is small compared
to the detected percent discrepancies between direct contact and
spatter.
2.3. Microscopic analysis of the fabric topography
A Zeta-20 Optical Proﬁler Microscope System was used to
examine the topography of the fabric surfaces. The Zeta-20 system
allowed simultaneous 2D and 3D (confocal) imaging of the surfaces
and provided a way of quantifying the height variation between
adjacent loop legs. For each fabric type, ﬁve images of randomly
selected areas were taken and scanned. In each image, three cross-
sectional proﬁles lines of equal length were drawn across a
minimum of 5 alternating loop legs in a row. Thus, 15 rows of loop
legs per fabric type were analyzed.
3. Results
3.1. Microscopic images of spatter versus contact transfer patterns
Fig. 3 shows representative low magniﬁcation images of spatter
and contact transfer patterns. Fig. 3a is a representative image of
spatter pattern formed by a single spray of porcine blood sample
directly onto the 100% cotton fabric, while Fig. 3b and c shows
transfer patterns generated by contacting the fabric with blood
sprayed onto leather and glass respectively. The spatter and
transfer bloodstain patterns qualitatively look similar and are
difﬁcult to differentiate simply by visual inspection, at least at
low magniﬁcation.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the experimental methodology. (a) Generation of spatter pattern via direct spraying of aerosolized blood. (b) Generation of a contact transfer
pattern via a two-step process: direct spraying onto a donor surface (leather or glass), and then contact transfer onto the fabric.
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240 
235


--- PAGE 4 ---

Although the stain types are difﬁcult to differentiate at low
magniﬁcation, at higher magniﬁcation some trends become
apparent. Fig. 4 shows representative microscopic images of (a)
spatter stain, (c) transfer stain from leather, and (e) transfer stain
from glass, respectively. The corresponding magniﬁcations of the
highlighted areas are shown at right. Note that the two orienta-
tions of loop legs are clearly visible. In the contact transfer patterns,
each loop leg tends to be either completely saturated with blood
or devoid of blood, a characteristic which is distinct from spatter.
A qualitative observation, most apparent in Fig. 4e and f, is that the
left loop legs are stained more frequently than the right loop legs. In
Fig. 4f, for example, there are 9 stained left loop legs but only
4 stained right loop legs, i.e., 69% of the stained loop legs occurred on
left loop legs. The same counting method using the 75% coverage
minimum was used to analyze all 1200 high magniﬁcation images.
Each image had on average approximately 50 stained loop legs;
approximately 65,000 individual stained loop legs were counted.
3.2. Count of ‘‘stained loop legs’’ by orientation
To see if the qualitative disparity in stained loop leg orientations
shown in Fig. 4 was robust, we counted the number of stained left
loop legs and right loop legs in each microscopic image. The
resulting comparison of stained loop leg orientation between
spatter patterns and contact transfer patterns is shown for both
fabric types in Fig. 5. Each histogram shows the absolute count of
microscopic images that contained a speciﬁed percentage of
stained left loop legs. Note that each histogram is based on the
analysis of a total of 20 images  10 replicates = 200 microscopic
images for each experimental condition, i.e., each speciﬁed pattern
and fabric type. Since in any given image there are equal numbers
of left loop legs and right loop legs, one might expect that the odds
of obtaining stained left loop legs versus stained right loop legs
would be even, i.e., each histogram would be Gaussian centered
around 50%. Instead, however, we observe a pronounced tilt in the
histograms in favor of left loop legs over right. For the direct spatter
patterns (Fig. 5a and d) the shift is minor: each distribution is
centered around 55%. In contrast, the contact transfer patterns
exhibited signiﬁcant preferential staining of left loop legs: for
leather (Fig. 5b and e) the distributions are centered around 60%
and 65% respectively for pure cotton and 50/50 cotton/polyester.
The trend is even more stark for contact transfer on glass (Fig. 5c
and f), with the distributions centered around 70% and 85% for pure
cotton and 50/50 cotton/polyester. Notably, similar trends were
observed for both the 100% cotton and the 50% cotton/50%
polyester fabrics. We note that there is an increasing trend of more
images with higher % stained left loop legs from spatter stain
pattern to transfer pattern and also from leather surface to glass
surface for transfer patterns.
These results, and corresponding tests for statistical signiﬁ-
cance, are summarized in Fig. 6. Here the percent of stained left
loop legs is averaged over the 10 replicate trials for each condition,
rather than examined by individual image as in Fig. 5, to test for
trial reproducibility and statistical signiﬁcance. As shown in Fig. 6,
the spatter patterns for pure cotton and 50/50 cotton/polyester had
respectively 53.0  1.9% and 53.7  2.4% stained left loop legs. In
contrast, the pure cotton fabric had 56.2  2.2% stained left loop legs
when transferred from leather, and 64.1  3.4% stained left loop legs
when transferred from glass. Likewise, the 50/50 cotton/polyester
had 64.3  5.8% when transferred from leather, and an extremely
high 82.2  4.5% when transferred from glass. Student’s t-test was
used to determine whether each contact transfer pattern distribution
differed signiﬁcantly from the corresponding spatter distribution; as
indicated by the asterisks in Fig. 6, all of the contact transfer patterns
were statistically signiﬁcantly different compared to the spatter
patterns. The most similar distribution, for pure cotton transferred
from leather, had a p-value of 0.00218; the other p-values were
negligibly small (at 0.00018, 0.00000039 and 0.000000000067). In
other words, the differences between the spatter and contact transfer
were statistically robust in all four examined conditions.
3.3. Analysis of fabric topography
According to the orientation count results, several general-
izations can be made: (1) left loop legs are signiﬁcantly more likely
Fig. 3. Representative low magniﬁcation images of (a) spatter pattern, (b) transfer
pattern from leather; and (c) transfer pattern from glass. All three patterns are on
100% cotton fabric.
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240
236


--- PAGE 5 ---

to be stained versus right loop legs on transfer patterns generated
from both leather and glass donor surfaces and for both types of
fabrics; (2) stained left loop legs are just slightly over 50% on
spatter stain patterns for both fabric types; (3) the fabric composed
of 50% cotton 50% polyester has a noticeably higher percent of
stained left loop legs than the 100% cotton fabric; (4) transfer
patterns generated from smooth glass surface have higher percent
of stained left loop legs than from rough leather surface for both
fabric types. Put more succinctly, the data in Figs. 4–6 make clear
that stains preferentially occur in left loop legs during contact
transfer as opposed to the roughly even distribution that occurs
during direct spatter. A key question is: why? In other words, what
differentiates the left loop legs such that blood preferentially
adsorbs into them during contact transfer?
One simple explanation would be that the fabric surface is
asymmetric, such that the left loop legs protrude further out of the
fabric surface and simply make contact with the blood more
readily than the right loop legs. To test this hypothesis, we used the
Zeta-20 Optical Proﬁler to measure the height proﬁle of the fabrics.
Figs. 7a and 8a are representative 2D images of the fabric surface
on 100% cotton and 50% cotton/50% polyester as captured by the
Zeta-20 Optical Microscope System. Height information from the
proﬁler was extracted from representative cross sections, as
indicated by the three lines of equal length running across the loop
legs. The heights at the same relative position on the three lines
were averaged and a single height proﬁle extracted as a function of
lateral position along the line. This procedure was repeated on
images of four other randomly selected areas per each fabric type.
The resulting average proﬁles are displayed in Figs. 7b and 8b,
which show plots of the average height with respect to normalized
lateral position for 100% cotton and 50% cotton/50% polyester
respectively. On the 2D images, the highest points (maxima) of ﬁve
loop legs in a given row are labeled as letters A–E, and the
corresponding ﬁve peaks in the height proﬁles are likewise labeled
A–E 
accordingly. 
The 
height 
difference 
of 
the 
maxima 
of
neighboring loop legs was found to be on the order of 20 to
30 mm for the 100% cotton fabric, and closer to 50 mm for the 50%
cotton/50% polyester fabric. The topographical surface examina-
tion shows that the left loop legs are noticeably higher than the
neighboring right loop legs in term of height. The consistent height
difference between adjacent loop legs in opposing orientations is
likely to be the explanation for the predominant counts of stained
left loop legs over right loop legs. In other words, for transfer stain
patterns, the protruding loop legs come into contact with blood
Fig. 4. Representative micrographs of 100% cotton fabric showing bloodstains formed either by spatter (a, b) or contact transfer via leather (c, d) or glass (e, f). Images at right
(b, d and f) are magniﬁed images of selected areas at left. According to our deﬁnition of stained loop leg (a minimum of 75% of an individual loop leg observably stained with
blood), the images in (b), (d), and (f) have 3, 8, and 9 stained left loop legs and 1, 6, and 4 right loop legs respectively.
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240 
237


--- PAGE 6 ---

droplets ﬁrst such that there are more protruding loop legs stained
with blood than recessed loop legs. Notably, the height differences
are correlated with the trends observed in stained loop leg
orientation: the 50/50 cotton/polyester had both a larger height
difference and a larger tendency to stain left loop legs preferen-
tially. 
Taken 
together, 
the 
data 
strongly 
suggest 
that 
the
asymmetry in fabric morphology gives rise to the asymmetry in
stained loop leg orientation.
4. Discussion and conclusions
The microscopic analysis performed here strongly indicates
that topographical height differences between loop legs in the
fabric is associated with quantitative orientation counts of loop
legs. This result could serve as a basis for developing quantitatively
rigorous methodologies for distinguishing transfer stains from
spatter stains on a variety of fabric materials, provided they have
some sort of topographical asymmetry. Although we focused here
on Stockinette patterns, the methodology developed could be
extended for use in fabric types with other common knitting
patterns that have distinct topographical features. As clothing
materials with bloodstains are commonly found in crime scenes, a
more quantitative differentiation between spatter patterns and
transfer patterns would be beneﬁcial to the reconstruction of
events at crime scenes. One obvious area for improvement involves
the method of counting stained loop legs. Here we used a manual
approach, which had a reproducibility between analysts of about
5.7%. A more rigorous approach would be to use image analysis
algorithms to automatically analyze the percent coverage of each
loop leg, i.e., to remove human interpretation completely. The key
point here, however, is that the detected discrepancies in loop leg
counts between direct contact and spatter far exceed 5%, strongly
Fig. 5. Histograms of the number of microscopic images with speciﬁed % stained left loop legs, comparing spatter and contact transfer stains formed on two different types of
fabrics, 100% cotton and 50% cotton/50% polyester. Each histogram is based on 200 microscopic images (10 replicates per condition, and 20 microscopic images per replicate).
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240
238


--- PAGE 7 ---

suggesting that the results merit further investigation and
reﬁnement of the image analysis technique.
Furthermore, the results presented here raise several fascinat-
ing and pertinent questions. First, how does the disparity in stained
left versus right loop legs vary with height asymmetry? Here we
examined only two fabrics, so a more comprehensive survey of
many fabric types would be helpful to develop a quantitative
correlation. Second, we performed the contact transfer as soon as
possible after spraying the blood onto the donor surface (glass or
leather), but if the blood is left to evaporate for some time then its
physical properties (e.g., viscosity and interfacial tension) will
change. ‘‘Drier’’ blood will likely also yield discrepancy between
stained left and right loop legs, but quantitative corroboration is
necessary. Third, we performed all contact transfer in this study
simply by pressing the fabric onto the donor surface by hand, using
(to the best of our ability) the same applied force each time. Given
our proposed mechanism, a possibility worth investigating is that
the pressure exerted during the contact transfer could alter the
microscopic distribution of stained loop legs. For example one
possible hypothesis is that a low application of force (i.e., a ‘light
push’) yields a higher discrepancy between left and right loop legs
because the recessed legs fail to reach the drops, whereas a high
application of force (i.e., a ‘heavy push’) minimizes the discrepancy
by bringing the recessed loop legs in closer contact with the drops.
Likewise, this study restricted attention to contact transfer
performed by applying pressure to the fabric normally (orthogo-
nally) to the donor surface; the effect of shearing motions (i.e.,
‘brushing or swiping’) tangential to the donor surface remain to be
examined. The present study will serve as a framework to address
these more complicated questions, and help put bloodstain pattern
analysis on a more quantitative footing.
Acknowledgments
Support for this research was provided by the National Institute
of Justice (Award No. 2010-DN-BX-K039). Opinions or points of view
expressed in this paper represent a consensus of the authors and do
not necessarily represent those of the U.S. Department of Justice.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2015.01.021.
Fig. 6. Orientation counts of stained left loop legs in spatter and contact transfer
patterns, formed on 100% cotton and 50% cotton/50% polyester, average over
10 replicate trials. The error bars represent  one standard deviation. Student’s t-test
was used to determine p values for the null hypothesis that the contact transfer
orientation counts were statistically equivalent to the spatter orientation counts.
*p < 0.01, **p < 0.001.
Fig. 7. (a) Representative micrograph of the 100% cotton fabric. (b) Corresponding
average height proﬁle of the three lines shown in (a). Letters A–E denote the
corresponding positions in (a). The orange dotted lines indicate  1 standard
deviation. Note the left loop legs (A, C, E) protrude further out than the right loop legs
(B, D) by roughly 20 to 30 mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 8. (a) Representative micrograph of the 50% cotton 50% polyester fabric. (b)
Corresponding average height proﬁle of the three lines shown in (a). Letters A–E
denote the corresponding positions in (a). The orange dotted lines indicate 1
standard deviation. Note the left loop legs (A, C, E) protrude further out than the right
loop legs (B, D) by roughly 30–50 mm.
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240 
239


--- PAGE 8 ---

References
[1] SWGSTAIN, Scientiﬁc Working Group on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: Recommended
Terminology. http://www.swgstain.org/documents/SWGSTAIN%20Terminology.pdf.
[2] Indiana v. David Camm, 812N.E.2d 1127, Ind. App., 2004.
[3] People v. McWhorter, 47 Cal. 4th 318, 330–332, 2009.
[4] The National Research Council, Strengthening Forensic Science in the United
States: A Path Forward, National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2009.
[5] C.Willis, A.K. Piranian,J.R. Donaggio, R.J. Barnett, W.F. Rowe,Errors intheestimation of
the distance of fall and angles of impact blood drops, Forensic Sci. Int. 123 (2001) 1–4.
[6] W.F. Rowe, Errors in the determination of the point of origin of bloodstains,
Forensic Sci. Int. 161 (2006) 47–51.
[7] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics in
bloodstain pattern analysis: Comparative review and research opportunities,
Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (2013) 375–396.
[8] B. Karger, S.P. Rand, B. Brinkmann, Experimental bloodstains on fabric from
contact and from droplets, Int. J. Legal Med. 111 (1998) 17–21.
[9] M. Holbrook, Evaluation of blood deposition on fabric: distinguishing spatter and
transfer stains, IABPA News 26 (2010) 3–12.
[10] S.J. Kadolph, Textiles, 11th ed., Prentice Hall, New York, 2010.
Y. Cho et al. / Forensic Science International 249 (2015) 233–240
240
