

--- PAGE 1 ---

Automated reconstruction of cast-off blood spatter patterns based on
Euclidean geometry and statistical likelihood
Scott McClearya, Eugene Lisciob, Kris De Brabanterc,d, Daniel Attingere,f,*
a 240 E Walnut St APT 108, Des Moines, IA, 50309, United States
b P. Eng., ai2-3D, 271 Jevlan Drive, Unit 14, Woodbridge, Ontario, L4L 8A4, Canada
c Iowa State University, Department of Statistics, 2419 Snedecor Hall, 2438 Osborn Dr., Ames, IA, 50011-1210, United States
d Department of Industrial Manufacturing & Systems Engineering, 3033 Black Engineering, 2529 Union Dr, Ames, IA, 50011-2030, United States
e Struo LLC, Ames, IA, 50010, United States
f Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University, 2025, Black Engineering, Ames, 50011, IA, United States
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 30 September 2020
Received in revised form 18 November 2020
Accepted 23 November 2020
Available online 1 December 2020
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Crime scene reconstruction
Open source software
A B S T R A C T
Cast-off spatter patterns exhibit linear trails of elliptical stains. These characteristic patterns occur by
centrifugal forces that detach drops from a swinging object covered with blood or other liquid. This
manuscript describes a method to reconstruct the motion, or swing, of the object. The method is based on
stain inspection and Euclidean geometry. The reconstructed swing is represented as a three-dimensional
region of statistical likelihood. The reconstruction uncertainty corresponds to the volume of the
reconstructed region, which is speciﬁc to the uncertainties of the case at hand. Simple numerical
examples show that the reconstruction method is able to reconstruct multiple swings that are either
intersecting or adjacent to each other. The robustness, spatial convergence, computing time of the
reconstruction method is characterized. For the purpose of this study, about 20 cast-off experiments are
produced, with motion of the swinging object documented using video and/or accelerometers. The
swings follow circular or arbitrary paths, and are either human- or machine-made. The reconstruction
results are compared with the experimentally documented swings. Agreement between measured and
reconstructed swings is very good, typically within less than 10 cm. The method used in this study is
implemented as a numerical code written in an open source language, provided in an open access
repository, for purposes of transparency and access.
© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Cast-off spatters often occur during crimes involving beating
events. In the context of bloodstain pattern analysis, a cast-off
spatter pattern is deﬁned as “a bloodstain pattern resulting from
blood drops released from an object due to its motion” [1]. Cast-off
spatters occur when non-gravitational inertial forces overcome the
capillary forces retaining blood on an object experiencing linear or
rotational acceleration. In the latter case, the inertial forces are
called centrifugal forces. Cast-off patterns are characterized with
linear or curvilinear stain distributions [2]. Cast-off patterns tend
to be elongated, as compared to impact spatter that exhibit radial
dispersions as shown in Fig. 1(a) [3]. Other occurrences of cast-off
spatters involve water or mud projection by vehicle wheels. The
scope of this manuscript is focused on spatters relevant to
bloodstain pattern analysis.
The dynamics of cast-off formation have been well documented
[2,4–9]. Blood adhering by capillary forces on a swinging object
detaches when centrifugal forces become large enough to balance
capillary forces. The detaching drops leave the swinging object
tangentially to its swing, with an initial velocity equal in
magnitude and direction to that of the weapon at the instant of
detachment. The trajectories of the drops are then controlled by
gravitational and drag forces. They can be described with Newton’s
second law of motion. While several studies have described the
reconstruction of impact spatter patterns [10–15], where the area
of origin of the blood is assumed to be static, there is currently no
available method to reconstruct the trajectory of the swinging
object that generates a cast-off spatter pattern. Current recon-
struction methods for impact spatter patterns are called method of
strings or tangent method, assume the blood drops travel in straight
trajectories from the impacted blood source to the stain impact
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: scott.thomas.mccleary@gmail.com (S. McCleary),
eliscio@ai2-3d.com (E. Liscio), kbrabant@iastate.edu (K. De Brabanter),
Struo.Attinger@gmail.com (D. Attinger).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2020.110628
0379-0738/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

locations. The method presented in this manuscript is about
reconstructing the swing of the object causing the spatter pattern,
based on stain inspection and statistical methods.
Studies on cast-off patterns have also produced reconstruction
guidelines [2,4,16]. Recent advances in theory, measurement, and
crime scene processing have shed light on various aspects of cast-
off patterns [2,16,17]. Two studies, by Maloney [17] and Liscio [16],
propose methods for the analysis and interpretation of cast-off
patterns. 
Method 
[17] 
results 
in 
the 
determination 
of 
an
“approximate plane of motion”, a plane within which the bloody
weapon has probably swung. This plane of motion is calculated
using least squares and orthogonal regressions [17]. Method [16]
presents and determines a “path volume envelope” (x10 [16]) that
encloses the weapon swing. The path volume envelope is a box
“deﬁned as the space which contains all or part of the object path
which created the cast-off stains” (x8 in [16]). The method in [16]
also deﬁnes an “exclusion zone”, that is a volume where the cast-off
spatter pattern is not likely to have originated. Both methods result
in a plane containing the reconstructed motion of the weapon
swing, which is supposedly planar. The error associated with these
methods can be estimated as the distance between the plane, or
associated planar region, and the known cast-off swing motion.
Human created cast-off patterns, commonly present on crime
scenes, are not necessarily planar [2], and might involve multiple
swings.
To date, there are no methods to directly reconstruct the swing
(s) of a weapon from inspection of cast-off spatter patterns. In this
manuscript, we develop a geometric and statistical reconstruction
method. The geometric approach determines circular segments of
the weapon swing from triplets of stains, which are then
assembled statistically to reconstruct weapon swings featuring
variable radii and multiplanar motion. The reconstructed swing is
represented statistically with uncertainty regions [12], which are
volumes of arbitrary shape that are likely to contain the swing of
the weapon. Analog probabilistic approaches have been proposed
for the reconstruction of impact spatter patterns by Camana [12] in
2D and then by Attinger et al. in 3D [18]. The methods involve the
propagation of measurement uncertainties and the construction of
a joint probability density function (PDF) [18]. The method in this
manuscript is analog, in the sense that similar statistical methods
are used, however the reconstruction result is the path of a bloody
weapon rather than a stationary blood source.
2. Experiments
Fig. 1 shows the three setups used to produce cast-off patterns
to develop and test the reconstruction method. One set of cast-off
spatter patterns was produced with a sitting participant who
swung a wet rod around his shoulder, and two sets of patterns were
produced by circular and non-circular motions of a wet rod. A total
of about 20 spatter patterns was used to develop and test the
reconstruction method.
2.1. “Sitting” cast-off spatter patterns
Four cast-off spatter patterns were created by the ﬁrst author,
who swung a wooden rod while seating, as shown in Fig. 1b. Fluid
was ink solution (Royal Talens Amsterdam green and red acrylic
ink) diluted with an equal volume of deionized water, and later
swine 
blood. 
Swine 
blood 
trials 
were 
conducted at 
room
temperature, 22  1 C, with ethically-sourced heparinized blood
to prevent coagulation. Swine blood was chosen to minimize
biohazards, and is a substitute to human blood with similar
physical properties [5,19,20]. The blood was drawn less than 24 h
prior to experimentation and stored under refrigeration and on a
rocker. Hematocrit was measured within the range of 44–48% prior
to experimentation with a dedicated centrifuge device (STI,
Hemata-Stat-II). The blood was warmed to room temperature
while on a rocker before experimentation. The reconstruction
method proposed in this manuscript is independent on the ﬂuid
Fig. 1. Cast-off spatter patterns such as (a) have been generated in three ways: (b) participant “sitting” and rotating his arm, with measured weapon swing indicated in dashed
black arrow. (c) using a “Castanova” rig, where wooden arm rotates around ﬁxed axis driven by bungee cord, with measured swing motion as dashed black arrow; and (d) “
human” participant creating a cast-off pattern during downward swing. Reference markers on the ﬂoor help calibrate motion measurement, and position trackers are
mounted on the participant and on the bloody rod. The inset shows overlaid experiment video frames with the captured motion (in white). Tip of rod for each video frame is
highlighted as visual assistance.
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
2


--- PAGE 3 ---

properties which explain why the ﬁrst trials, done early in the
training of the ﬁrst author, were not done with blood. The wooden
rod was dipped in a 25 mL beaker containing a 15 mL ink solution
or swine blood to produce cast-off spatter patterns. The seated
position was used to maintain a constant center of rotation,
approximately around the shoulder.
The experiments were conducted in an enclosed room with
dimensions (X, Y, Z)=(248 cm, 159 cm, 243 cm) [21]. The swinging
motion was in a vertical plane. The swing radius was about 70 cm.
Stains were spattered onto the front, back, ceiling, and ground
surfaces, which were covered with butcher paper. Stains were
individually imaged at approximately 200–250 DPI with a DSLR
camera (Canon EOS 70D) with a plumb line and measurement
10  0.2 mm reference marker with manufacturer uncertainty
tolerancing (KISS System WMM50B Wound Mapping Marker).
Stain locations were measured with a square ruler referencing the
deﬁned origin room corner. Stain images were analyzed using
HemoSpat1 to determine stain width, length, and impact angles
[14], as illustrated in Fig. 2. The uncertainty on the weapon swing
was estimated as a radius of 5 cm.
2.2. Cast-off spatter patterns from the “Castanova” rig
Ten spatter patterns with the constant radius “Castanova”
mechanical cast-off rig were performed as described in [22], with
method summarized here. An amount of 5 mL of sheep blood at
23  1 C was deposited to the end of a wooden arm afﬁxed with a
3D printed sphere with diameter of 4 cm. Hematocrit for sheep
blood ranges between 13 and 32% [23]. The arm was able to rotate
around a ﬁxed axis, was drawn back with a bungee cord and
released to produce the cast-off spatter. The swing motion was
constrained in a vertical plane and spatter stains were produced
mostly on the front wall. The experiments involved pattern
generation, identiﬁcation, bloodstain labeling and photographing,
laser scanning (here FARO Focus S350 with ranging error of 1 mm
and angular accuracy of 19 arcseconds), with reference markers on
the wall. Data analysis in a computer aided design (CAD) program
(FARO Zone 3D) was used to align stain photographs with a three-
dimensional representation of the room. Results were displayed by
importing all data into 3ds Max [22]. The cast-off rig produced ﬁve
trials at 0.5 m and another ﬁve trials 1.0 m from the target surface
[22]. The velocity of the cast-off producing end of the member after
the trials was approximately 10:5  1:2  m
s [22]. A detailed three-
dimensional analysis of the experiments is available in [22].
The uncertainty on the weapon swing was estimated as a radius of
2.7 cm.
2.3. “Human”, non-circular cast-off spatter patterns
Six cast-off patterns were generated by a human participant
swinging a wooden rod in a non-circular trajectory representative
of an actual ﬁght (“human” cast-offs #1–4, 6–7). The documenta-
tion and measurements process of the stains was same as with the
Castanova rig. In the experiments, the blood was previously
donated from volunteers, and spiked with anticoagulant. The blood
was heated to room temperature (approximately 23 C) prior to
use.
The motion of the weapon relative to the bloodstained surfaces
was measured and documented as follows. Eighteen accelerometer
and gyroscope systems were used (MTw Awinda from Xsens [24]).
This motion capture system is a commercial motion capture
system with six degrees of freedom (linear accelerations along (X,
Y, Z) coordinates axes and rotational accelerations along three
perpendicular ðf; u; cÞ orientations). The motion capture system
determines the (X, Y, Z) coordinate locations from the linear and
rotational accelerations. The measurement setup allows for
eighteen body motion trackers placed at various areas on the
body and one additional tracker ﬁxed on the item being used as a
“weapon”.
The weapon used for this study was a wooden rod with a length
of 34 cm and a diameter of approximately 4 cm. A tracker was
placed on the rod, ﬁxed at a known position along the length of the
rod at approximately 10 cm from the end held by the subject. To
reconstruct the motion of the end of the rod, the tracker data is
translated by the corresponding length and oriented. The motion
capture system requires that the person being recorded is
“calibrated” in the system by entering their body dimensions
and then by moving through a routine of prescribed motions that
accurately calibrate each tracker to their respective position on the
subject.
The motion recording began with the right foot of the
participant aligned onto a reference marker on the ground. The
participant then wet the rod by dipping into a small bowl of blood.
Participants were directed to take a few steps towards the wall
directly in front of them and then swing the rod with enough force
to create a cast-off pattern. The motion started with the arm
lowered, then raised up, then quickly downwards. Once the
striking motion was complete, the subject was asked to step back
and reposition their right foot on the marker. The recording was
then ended. A total of six trials were recorded, all of which are used
in this manuscript.
In addition to the motion capture system, a Microsoft Kinect
sensor was used to record motion point cloud data of the subject
creating the cast-off pattern [25,26]. This was used as a redundant
external system of a color CGA video camera in RGB and an infrared
projector with 640  480 pixel resolution at 30 frames per second.
The system allowed for the walls, ﬂoor, and motion of the subject to
be captured in the global scale of the room. The motion capture
system did not have any external references and thus, having the
participant place their right foot on a known marker at the
beginning and end of each trial was used to accommodate for any
drift or other possible inaccuracies in the motion capture system.
Based on the above setup, it was possible to align all the data such
that the motion of the rod was measured in relation to the rest of the
room during the generation of the cast-off pattern. The uncertainty
on the weapon swing was estimated as a radius of 5.4 cm.
Fig. 2. Impact angle α, directional angle g, and angle b are determined from
inspection of stain ellipticity and directionality. Symbols da and dg are the
uncertainty on the estimated direction of the respective impact velocity and
of the main axis of the stain. Drop impact vector ~V is shown with its three
components Vx, Vy, and Vz [13]. Coordinates XYZ are global coordinates.
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
3


--- PAGE 4 ---

3. Theoretical reconstruction of cast-off patterns
3.1. Geometric reconstruction of segments of the weapon swing
The proposed reconstruction method is based on the fact that
drops leave the weapon tangentially to its trajectory and on the
assumptions that (1) the trajectories of the drops are linear, along a
line that contains the stain of interest, with slope estimated from
stain inspection and (2) that the weapon follows a circular
trajectory, at least over small displacements (piecewise circular
swing).
Under these two assumptions, each circular piece of the swing
can be reconstructed as in Fig. 3. To do so, we use a geometrical
property of triangles adjacent to a circle, as in Proposition 4 of book
IV of the Elements by Euclid. Euclid lived in the third century before
the Common Era and is considered the founder of geometry. To the
best of our knowledge, he did not produce any work on forensics,
unlike his younger contemporary Archimedes who is credited with
uncovering commercial fraud by applying the buoyancy laws [27]
that he discovered. In the application of Euclidean geometry
proposed here, the green circle describes the trajectory of the
weapon, and the adjacent triangle ðA; B; CÞ is formed by inter-
sections of the trajectories of three blood drops, reconstructed
from stains M, L, N. In his proposition x127, Lachlan [28] shows that
Euclid’s work implies that “The internal bisector of the angle BAC,
and the external bisectors of the angles ABC, ACB, are concurrent.
Let the point in which they meet be denoted by I1. This point is the
centre of a circle which can be drawn to touch the sides of the
triangle, but it is on the side of BC remote to A. This circle is called
an escribed circle [ . . . ] L1, M1, N1 be the points of contact of the
sides with this circle”.
In the forensic reconstruction task at hand, the escribed circle
proposition is valid for any set of three stains where trajectories of
the associated drops are not parallel, such as the set labelled M, L, N
in Fig. 3. Using this proposition, triplets of three adjacent stains will
typically determine an escribed circle along which the swinging
weapon is most likely to have travelled. More precisely, the arc
shown in magenta in Fig. 3 connects the three points of contact of
the stain trajectories with the escribed circle, and best approx-
imates the likely reconstructed weapon swing. Then, the various
arcs produced by various triplets of stains are combined in the
probabilistic manner described below, so that circular and non-
circular curves of swinging weapon can be reconstructed.
3.2. Probabilistic reconstruction of the weapon swing
The geometric reconstruction approach above produces multi-
ple segments in the form of arcs. A probabilistic approach has been
developed to achieve two tasks: adding a speciﬁc thickness to the
reconstructed arcs based on the propagation of measurement
uncertainties 
(the 
thickness 
being 
a 
representation 
of 
the
uncertainty in determining the swing motion) and merging the
arcs obtained from all the reconstructed triplets/triplets of stains
into a volume that reconstructs most of the swing of the weapon.
Each reconstructed arc has the appearance, visually and culinary
speaking, of a noodle. The centerline of the noodle describes the
most likely arc associated with a triplet of stain, and the thickness
of the noodle, the associated uncertainty. The volume merged from
all the arcs may assume any shape based on the probabilistic union
of multiple arcs with given thickness.
Based on the principle of maximum likelihood estimation, the
uncertainty of the reconstructed arc is expressed probabilistically,
in a manner analogous to what Camana [12] and Attinger et al. [18]
have done for impact spatter patterns (the simpler situation where
the blood source is assumed to be immobile). In the present case,
we assume that the uncertainty of any measurement relevant to
the reconstruction process can be expressed as a probability
density function (PDF), Eq. (1), where m is the mean of the
measurement, sk is the standard deviation, and x is a continuous
random variable, such as an angle or a distance:
ck x
ð Þ ¼
1
sk
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
e
1
2
xm
sk
 
2
ð1Þ
The space considered in the analysis is the room containing the
blood spatter pattern. It is discretized with a Cartesian grid into
uniform cubic regions. As shown in Fig. 4, the relative position of
any given spatial region is expressed with respect to the
reconstructed arc using the radial distance Djn between the
center of a cube j and reconstructed cast-off arc n. In these symbols,
index j represents a given region in space, and index n refers to the
cast-off arc segment reconstructed from the n-th triplet of stains as
per method in Fig. 3. The radial distance is used as the continuous
variable in Eq. (1) to estimate the relative likelihood that any given
discretized region contains the reconstructed cast-off segment.
The probability that a given point in space is associated with a
cast-off arc reconstructed from an arbitrary set of three stains can
be quantiﬁed with the PDF
cjn ¼
1
SFjn 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
e
1
2
Djn
SFjn
 
2
ð2Þ
As shown in Fig. 5, this PDF is maximum for Djn ¼ 0, which
gives 
most 
weight 
to 
spatial 
regions 
coincident 
with 
the
reconstructed arc. By deﬁnition of a normal distribution, the term
SFjn, in cm, is a spreading parameter that controls the shape of the
distribution. Small spreading values correspond to very local
distributions, while larger spreading values spread the distribution
over larger distances. To deﬁne the spreading value, we postulate
that it depends on three independents quantities, graphically
represented in the inset of Fig. 5. We deﬁne
SFjn ¼ f a ; ’ ;Dwall
ð 
Þ 
ð3Þ
a function of the following variables: a, a measurement of the
angular uncertainty associated with the triplet of stains associated
with a reconstructed arc; ’, an angle measuring the planar
alignment of the three impact velocities associated with the triplet
of stains and the best-ﬁt plane containing the reconstructed arc;
and Dwall, a measure of the distance between the triplet of the
stains and the reconstructed arc. It is expected that function f in
Eq. (3) increases monotonically with the increase of each of the
three variables a ; ’ ;Dwall. Indeed, a reconstructed arc will be
known more accurately if there is little angular uncertainty in the
related drop impact; if the directionalities of the stains align in the
Fig. 3. Escribed circle to ﬀBAC for stain trajectories derived from stains M, L, N.
The points of contact of the stain trajectories with this circle are M1, L1, N1
containing the weapon swing arc.
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
4


--- PAGE 5 ---

same plane; and if the reconstructed arc is close to the stained wall
(because of the assumption of straight trajectories). A full
deﬁnition of SFjn is provided in Supplementary Documentation,
and eight numerical examples of the related PDF cjn are plotted in
Fig. 5. In short, the spread SFjn is the product of the angular
uncertainty of the stains in the triplet considered, and the average
distance between the reconstructed arc and the stains. This way,
the contributions of arcs reconstructed with higher accuracy are
more signiﬁcant (less spread-out) than those of arcs involving
more uncertainty in their position. The PDF of Eq. (2) represents
the likelihood that a region in space is associated with a
reconstructed cast-off arc n.
The likelihood that a region in space is associated with a cast-off
event is then obtained as the product of the PDFs associated with
each triplets of stains, as per Eq. (4), with N triplets.
cj ¼
YN
n¼1 cjn
ð4Þ
Finally, the uncertainty UL of a reconstruction is simply
measured as the volume in space where the value of cj is larger
than an assumed likelihood value. For instance, U75% is the
uncertainty of a cast-off reconstruction assuming a likelihood
value L=75%. Uncertainty UL has units of volume, for example liter
(L).
Fig. 4. Geometry used for the reconstruction of a cast-off arc. The clustered mean plane is a best-ﬁt plane to the triplet n of drop trajectories considered and contains the
reconstructed arc (in red). The distance between a spatial region jn and the arc n is measured with (green) distance Djn. Colors available in online version. (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 5. Shapes and values of PDF distributions corresponding to various types of stain triplets. The spread SFjn and height of the PDF depends on angular uncertainty of
stain measurement (here represented by a), alignment of the stains with the plane of the reconstructed arc (’), and on the distance Dwall between the
reconstructed arc and the stains. The most important PDFs for reconstruction are narrow and correspond to triplets of stains that are elliptical, well aligned with
the plane of the reconstructed arc, and close to that arc.
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
5


--- PAGE 6 ---

4. Numerical and software implementation of the theoretical
cast-off reconstruction model
4.1. Choice of software, scene processing and input data
The reconstruction model presented above is implemented as a
software script that runs with Octave [29]. Octave is a free, open-
source language generally compatible with Matlab1, a commercial
scientiﬁc computing environment widely used in academia. The
choice of Octave was made to address the common problem that
forensic practitioners and other engineers rarely have commercial
licenses of Matlab1. The software script has been checked to also
be compatible with Matlab1. To reconstruct a spatter pattern, the
inputs in Table 1 are similar to those required for existing impact
spatter patterns reconstruction software, such as Hemospat1.
Inputs required are room dimensions, the area of investigation
deﬁned by four walls (ﬂoor, ceiling and two vertical walls); normal
unit vectors, by convention oriented outside of the room of the
walls considered; tangential vectors to the walls considered
(coplanar vectors to each wall in the direction of gravity unless
walls are orthogonal to gravity in which case tangential vectors are
deﬁned in the positive x-direction); a global origin (to deﬁne an
XYZ-coordinate system as shown in Fig. 2; stain locations (XYZ
component positions of the stain in centimeters relative to the
origin location); stain directional angle g, deﬁned as the stain
glancing angle between the projected trajectory vector onto the
impacted surface and the tangent vector to the surface, and stain
impact angle alpha a, the stain impact angle between the
trajectory vector and the impacted surface as shown in Table 1.
Inputs mentioned above are entered by the analyst in the input ﬁle
in order observed along the curvilinear cast-off patterns, in a
comma-separated spreadsheet. A script, also called driver, formats
and converts that spreadsheet units into data with format
compatible with main software script.
4.2. Description of the reconstruction software
4.2.1. Determination of impact velocities
The yawing angle b ¼ arctan
tan a
ð Þ
sin g
ð Þ
 

in Fig. 2 is calculated from
the a and g impact angles [13]. Euclidean vector components are
deﬁned for each surface to describe stain impact angles in a global
reference frame, surface deﬁnitions included in supplementary
documentation.
4.2.2. Geometric reconstruction of individual cast-off arcs
Using the geometric reconstruction method presented in
section 2.1, three escribed circles are deﬁned on the triangle
formed by the three converging drop trajectories [30] of a triplet of
stains. To provide a best guess for which of these three circles is
relevant to the cast-off swing, we use the Pratt ﬁt method. The Pratt
ﬁt method is a curve ﬁt method that algebraically ﬁts a circle to
data points [31]. The Pratt ﬁt method determines a ﬁtted circle
center to be used as an approximated escribed circle reference
point ½xref ; zref , and this information is used to select the
appropriate escribed circle, and apply the Euclidean theorem in
section 2.1 to reconstruct the cast-off swing. More details on the
Pratt ﬁt method are in the Supplementary Documentation.
While Euclid’s escribed circles theorem (section 2.1) is deﬁned
in a single plane, the drop trajectories of any triplet of identiﬁed
stains are not necessarily in the same plane (while being
approximately in the same plane, which results in the linear
aspect of the pattern characteristic of cast-offs). To apply Euclid’s
theorem, we project the trajectories associated with the three
stains of the triplet onto the best possible plane. This plane that we
call the best-ﬁt plane is the plane that minimizes the alteration of
stain trajectories of the tree stains considered in each triplet. The
best-ﬁt plane is deﬁned by a normal unit vector 	 n that minimizes
the projection alterations (it minimizes its dot product with the
stain trajectory vectors). This minimization task is done with either
the Nelder-Mead [32] or Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, with the
Y-axis as initial guess. Vector 	 n and the point closest to the three
stain determine the best-ﬁt plane. Stain locations and their
respective drop trajectories vectors are then translated and rotated
onto the XZ-plane to reduce the stain trajectory intersections to a
two-dimensional problem.
Typical reconstruction cases involved between N = 5–100
triplets of stains. Given the narrow distributions of the PDFs in
Eq. (2), and their N-time multiplication as per Eq. (4), there is a risk
that the likelihood associated with a given region of space
becomes zero during the reconstruction process, because of the
ﬁnite numerical resolution of the computer performing the
calculation. To avoid such artiﬁcial loss of data, the PDFs of
individual triplets of stains are truncated to be at least as large as
their 3-s value, and the product of likelihood in Eq. (4) is rescaled
as the computation proceeds. For reconstructing cast-off arcs, we
could 
select 
every 
distinct 
combination 
of 
stain 
triplet
N
3
  ¼  
N!
3! N3
ð 
Þ!, less the triplets exhibiting at least two stains
with parallel trajectories, for which there would no intersection of
bisectors. Each triplet of non-parallel trajectories determines one
triangle with 3 escribed circles. The escribed circle with center
closest to ½xref ; zref , identiﬁed with the Pratt-ﬁt method, would
provide 
an 
arc 
of 
the 
cast-off, 
and 
its 
center, 
using 
the
Euclidean geometric theorem above. However, we found that
the recorded swings were reconstructed in the most robust
manner by selecting only the triplets of stains located close to each
other, with approximately equal spacing along the stains. Selecting
the triplets that way ensured that not only the circular swings, but
swings of arbitrary trajectory shape would be reconstructed. The
open source software is freely available in an open access
repository [33].
Table 1
Example of user data inputs for the cast-off reconstruction software. Global origin defaults to 0; 0; 0
ð 
Þ and room dimensions are extracted from XYZ-location coordinates.
Project 
Stain 
Location x 
Location y 
Location z 
Surface 
M axis (mm) 
m axis (mm) 
alpha 
gamma
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UF01 
250 
35.9 
93.8 
Back Wall 
3.3 
3.2 
73.8 
60.4
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UF02 
250 
36.5 
117.7 
Back Wall 
3.5 
3.5 
79.8 
16.6
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UF03 
250 
34.9 
129.8 
Back Wall 
3.2 
3.1 
77.5 
21.4
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UF04 
250 
42.5 
170.6 
Back Wall 
4.2 
3.7 
62.4 
11.8
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UF05 
250 
46.4 
194.9 
Back Wall 
4.2 
3.1 
48 
0.2
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UU06 
196 
64.6 
243 
Ceiling 
3.9 
3.4 
62.7 
15
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UU07 
145.8 
65.9 
243 
Ceiling 
3.1 
2.9 
70.2 
72.8
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UU08 
55.2 
58.1 
243 
Ceiling 
3.7 
3.1 
57.4 
171.8
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UU09 
38.8 
54.8 
243 
Ceiling 
3.1 
2.3 
48.2 
167.8
cast-off_2019_06.21 
UU10 
22.8 
52 
243 
Ceiling 
2.7 
1.6 
37.2 
177
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
6


--- PAGE 7 ---

5. Results and discussion
In this section, reconstruction results are described. The
reconstructed patterns involve actual cast-off experiments, and
simulated cast-off patterns. The actual cast-off experiments
include swings executed along circular and non-circular swings
by human participants, and circular swings executed by the
rotating arm of a Castanova device, already presented in [16].
Reconstruction results are presented in terms of uncertainty
regions, which are spatial regions most likely to contain some of
the path of the weapon that generated the cast-off. The uncertainty
regions are estimated based on the geometric and probabilistic
methods expressed above. Three embedded uncertainty regions
are typically shown, each corresponding to a speciﬁc likelihood
value. The likelihood value mathematically corresponds to the
measure of goodness of a statistical ﬁt and can assume values
between zero and one. Practically, likelihood values of 60%, 75%
and 90% are used in this work. Low likelihood values correspond to
larger uncertainty volumes and higher chances of intersecting the
weapon swing. High likelihood values correspond to smaller
uncertainty volumes and lower chances of intersecting the weapon
swing.
For example, Fig. 6 displays reconstruction results for a
“Castanova” spatter pattern, where the motion of the blood-
covered rod is circular. Several orthonormal views are presented of
the uncertainty regions and measured weapon swing. Orthonor-
mal views conﬁrm that the reconstructed swing intersects with the
measured swing, and measure the uncertainty of the reconstructed
swing (which is represented by embedded regions of different
likelihood). For instance, the green volume in Fig. 6, U75%, is the
uncertainty on the reconstructed cast-off swing assuming a
likelihood value of 75%. A spatial resolution of 5 cm is used for
all the numerical results presented in this work, unless speciﬁed
otherwise.
The results of one of the “sitting” cast-off pattern, with
experimental details described above, are presented in Fig. 7.
The measured swing of the ink-covered rod intersects the
reconstructed swing. Fig. 7 also illustrates the effect of the spatial
reconstruction on the quality of the results. Results with a
resolution of 25 cm appear rough, while there is no obvious
difference in results with 10 cm or 5 cm resolution.
Fig. 8 displays the reconstruction results for non-circular
“human” cast-off spatter (trial 7). Cast-off reconstruction results
are superimposed with the corresponding captured cast-off
motion depicted by a black line and uncertainty region in yellow,
and video frames of the human subject producing the cast-off. The
measured weapon swing was clockwise and clearly intersects the
reconstructed regions.
For all the numerical results above, likelihood values have been
speciﬁcally selected to minimize both uncertainty and error in the
reconstruction. While the volume of the reconstructed swings is
the uncertainty on the reconstruction of the weapon motion
(which is a one-dimensional curved line, with zero volume), the
error in the reconstructed cast-off region can be measured as the
closest distance between the estimated reconstructed cast-off
region and the recorded cast-off motion. We assume that the latter,
within its own measurement uncertainty, is the most accurate
measurement of the swing. Fig. 9 illustrates how the uncertainty
and error vary with the selected likelihood value, showing average
values and standard deviations for the reconstruction of six
“human” cast-off spatter patterns, similar to and including that of
Fig. 8. The average volume of each uncertainty region is provided in
Fig. 9, as a function of the likelihood value. The volume of the
uncertainty region corresponding to likelihood L ¼ 90%, noted
U90%, is smaller than 20 L (the volume of a small daypack) for every
one of the trials studied. Among all trials, the average uncertainty
volumes U75% and U60% is respectively 104 L and 296 L, respectively.
The lower the likelihood value, the larger the volume of the
uncertainty region, until it becomes comparable to the volume of
the entire room volume (58,430 L). As reported in Fig. 9, the
average error associated with region U90% is 6 cm, and the error is
less than 17 cm for all the trials studied. The average error
associated with U75% for all trials is less than 2 cm. No error is found
for U60%, which means that this uncertainty region embed at least a
portion of the known cast-off motion for every trial considered.
The choice of likelihood value therefore controls the trade-off
between uncertainty and error. The lower the likelihood value, the
lower the error, but the larger the uncertainty. The sweet spot of
Fig. 6. Reconstruction of the weapon swing in “Castanova” spatter pattern #10, seen from different viewpoints. The reconstructed swing is the red, green, or blue volume
(respectively corresponding to likelihood of 90%, 75% or 60%), and intersects the measured cast-off swing (black arrow, with measurement uncertainty in yellow). (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
7


--- PAGE 8 ---

this trade-off is observed between L = 60% (where error is typically
zero and uncertainty is reasonably small), and L = 90% (where
uncertainty is minimal and error is about 10 cm). Thus, all the
reconstruction results in this study are represented with three
likelihood values of L = 60%, 75% and 90%.
Fig. 10 illustrates how the uncertainty in the reconstruction
results increase with the uncertainty on stain measurement. Stain
width and length can be measured within 0.1 mm uncertainty with
state-of-the-art cameras. However, historical cases or crime scene
videos 
typically 
provide 
lower 
resolution 
images, 
and 
the
Fig. 7. Reconstruction of the weapon swing in the “sitting” cast-off pattern. Comparison of reconstructed swings (red, green, blue volumes respectively correspond to to
likelihood of 90%, 75% or 60%. The measured cast-off swing is the black arrow, with its measurement uncertainty in yellow. The same experimental cast-off data is
reconstructed using three spatial resolutions: 25 cm, 10 cm and 5 cm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)
Fig. 8. Cast-off reconstruction of trajectories for non-circular “Human” cast-off spatter pattern, trial 7. Comparison of reconstructed swing (red, green, blue volumes
respectively correspond to reconstructions uncertainties of U90%;  U75%   and  U60%. The measured cast-off swing is the black arrow, with its measurement
uncertainty in yellow. Simulation results, video motion pictures and accelerometer-based weapon swing measurements are superimposed, using the software
CloudCompare. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
8


--- PAGE 9 ---

uncertainty on the stain size can be as large as 1 mm. The
reconstructed swings in Fig. 10 exhibit larger volumes for larger
uncertainty on the measurement of the stain. This trend is both
reasonable and an illustration that the reconstruction results
depend on the quality of the input pictures. The fact that “human”
cast-off #7 can be reconstructed assuming both values of stain
measurement uncertainty is also a sign of the robustness of the
reconstruction method. Ultimately, a reconstruction method
should propagate the uncertainties on the input data (here the
stain measurements), as done for other types of bloodstain pattern
analysis reconstruction [12,18]. This is technically achieved here
with the spread of the likelihood increasing with stain measure-
ment uncertainty, as shown in Eq. (2).
Every numerical method produces results that are sensitive to
the spatial discretization, so it is important to perform the
reconstruction 
with 
enough 
spatial 
discretization 
to 
make
discretization errors negligible. Here, the space is discretized in
cubes 
with 
side 
length 
r, 
oriented 
along 
the 
three 
main
coordinates. In Fig. 7, signiﬁcant differences in the shape of the
reconstructed regions are visible between the reconstructed
regions with r = 25 cm or 10 cm; the former appearing rougher
than the latter. We also measured that the larger the value of r, the
larger the volumes of the uncertainty regions. For instance, r = 30
cm would give uncertainty volumes 21% larger than those for r = 3
cm (the smallest resolution we have tested). Volumes of the
uncertainty regions agreed within 10% for resolutions r 
 7 cm, and
Fig. 9. Trade-off between uncertainty and error in the reconstruction of the six “human” cast-off trials, as a function of the likelihood value. The uncertainty is the volume of
the reconstructed region, while the error is the closest distance between the recorded motion of the bloody object and the reconstructed region. Standard deviations among
the trials are indicated by vertical bars. Images of hippopotamus and daypack are volume references to the reader, as is the volume of the room.
Fig.10. Effect of the quality of the stain measurement on the reconstruction results of Human cast-off spatter pattern #7. Stains with equivalent diameter of 3.3 mm have been
measured from high-quality photographs, corresponding to an uncertainty on the width and length of the stain of 0.1 mm. On the right, the same spatter pattern
reconstructed with 1 mm uncertainty in the width and length of the stain, as would be with lower resolution crime scene pictures. Reconstruction for stains measured with
more uncertainty exhibit a larger uncertainty as seen with the larger volumes of the reconstructed regions. Error in both cases is zero: the reconstructed region intersects with
the measured weapon swing.
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
9


--- PAGE 10 ---

within 5% for r 
 5 cm, with no observable signiﬁcant difference in
the shape between regions with r 
 7 cm. Results presented in this
study have thus been obtained with a spatial resolution r = 5 cm,
unless otherwise speciﬁed. Computing time varied linearly with
the volume of the space investigated, and was proportional to r5.
Typical reconstruction simulation times on a recent laptop (Intel I7
2.4 GHz processor) took 20 min with r = 5 cm, and 25 s with r = 20
cm. The latter resolution is adequate for investigative work,
suggesting that the method is suitable for real-time crime scene
processing.
To further assess the capabilities of the reconstruction method,
arbitrary spatter patterns have been numerically generated using
geometrical intersections between the tangents to prescribed
circles and the walls of a room. The prescribed swings (in black)
and the corresponding reconstruction are in Fig. 11. It appears that
the reconstruction method can help distinguishing multiple
swings from each other, such as circular swings in parallel planes
(a) or in intersecting planes (b); The method is also able to
reconstruct cast-off patterns where 
the swing 
has 
various
orientations with respect to the vertical plane (b).
6. Implications for crime scene reconstruction
This work provides a new tool to process crime scenes involving
linear spatter patterns characteristic of cast-off events. The
proposed tool can handle stains located on four perpendicular
surfaces such as the walls of a room. The reconstruction results are
provided with an uncertainty that is speciﬁc to the spatter pattern
at hand. Best reconstruction results are produced using all the
available stains, independently of size or ellipticity (see section
3.2). While round stains are usually avoided for area of origin
determinations, since they imply large directional uncertainty
[12], the proposed method automatically associates less weight to
reconstructed arcs associated with round stains. According to the
trade-off between uncertainty and error presented in Fig. 9,
likelihood values ranging from 60 
 L < 90% are recommended for
investigative work. Spatial resolution of r = 20 cm or less and
pictures with less than 0.1 mm uncertainty on stain size are
recommended for investigative work.
While the current model can be applied to investigative work on
current and historical forensic cases, there is room for future work.
First, the presented method assumes straight-line trajectories of the
drops. While this assumption can cause signiﬁcant errors in the
reconstruction of impact spatter patterns (which can be generated by
drops with wide range of sizes and initial velocities), it is not clear at
present how much errorin cast-off reconstruction occurs byassuming
straight trajectories. Possibly, the generation mechanism of cast-off is
different than impact spatter patterns and may produce different
distributions of drops sizes and velocities, that may be less subject to
deviation by drag and gravity. This hypothesis, as well as any
modiﬁcation of the method to address the curvature of the trajectories
by gravity is however a topic of further studies. What is currently
known is that reconstruction uncertainties associated with drag and
gravity strongly depend on the distance between wall and origin,
increasingwithapowerofaboutﬁveof thatdistance[18].Forexample,
one reviewerwhotested the accompanying software mentioned large
errors (more than two meters) for a case where a set of stains made on
two opposite walls, 5 m apart, were used to reconstruct a cast-off
pattern. Thus, analysts should be wary of reconstruction results where
the reconstructed swing or area of origin are not close to the wall, a
ﬁnding supported by experiments in [14]. This recommendation is
especially important for evaluative statements made during court
testimony. Furtherstudies mayalsoextendthesoftwarecapabilitiesto
handle stains on walls of arbitrary orientations, which will require
modiﬁcations to the data structure of the software. Handling stains on
walls of different materials may also require to have individual
measurement errors for each stain. It is also the ﬁrst time that the
authors propose a new reconstruction method as an open-source
software, with the hope that forensic researchers will use it and
provide feedback and input for future development.
7. Conclusions
In this manuscript, a method to reconstruct the motion, or
swing, of a weapon generating cast-off stains has been proposed,
based on stain inspection and Euclidean geometry. Agreement
between measured and reconstructed swings is characterized in
terms of error and uncertainty. For a series of six human-created
cast-off patterns, a trade-off is identiﬁed between the amount of
uncertainty and the magnitude of the error, which can be
controlled by selecting the likelihood value. Error was found to
be zero for likelihood values 60% or smaller. The reconstruction
Fig. 11. Ability of the algorithm to reconstruct spatter patterns produced by more than one cast-off swing event. Reconstruction of numerically generated stains prescribed by
two circular swings that are either adjacent (a) and intersecting (b).
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
10


--- PAGE 11 ---

method allows for consideration of stains on up to four surfaces
(front, back, ceiling and ground) and more than ﬁve-hundred
stains to be inputted. The reconstruction method is robust in the
sense that it delivers meaningful results for a broad range of spatial
resolution and for crime scenes documented with high- or low-
quality pictures. Speciﬁcally, the uncertainty of the reconstructed
results is speciﬁc to the quality of the pictures of the spatter stains:
results will have less uncertainty if the stains are measured with
more precision. The reconstruction software used in this study is
implemented as a numerical code written in an open source
language, provided in an open access repository. Opportunities for
future work are presented.
Contribution of authors
DA designed and led the project, and guided the development of
the software and reconstruction method. EL performed “Casta-
nova” and non-circular “Human” cast-off experiments, processed
the related patterns and swing motions, and provided the data. S.
MC designed and wrote the numerical code, and performed the
“Sitting” cast-off spatter experiments. De Brabanter provided input
on the statistical part of the code. Most of the manuscript was
written by SMC and DA, who both interpreted the results. All
authors contributed to and reviewed the ﬁnal manuscript.
Declaration of Competing Interest
There are no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgment
DA, KDB and SMC acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the
Center for Statistics and Applications in Forensic Evidence (CSAFE),
through Cooperative Agreement No. 70NANB15H176 between
NIST and Iowa State University, which includes activities carried
out at Carnegie Mellon University, University of California Irvine,
and University of Virginia. DA also acknowledges ﬁnancial support
from Iowa State University, as well as computing support from
Struo LLC, a scientiﬁc consulting company based in Ames IA. DA
thanks his Iowa State University colleague Xuan Hien Nguyen for
pointing out the Euclidean geometry proposition to him. EL would
like to thank Independent Forensic Services (IFS) for their
assistance and use of their facilities and resources in collecting
the human created cast-off patterns.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
The Supplementary Documentation related to this article can
be found, in the online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forsciint.2020.110628. The open source software is available in
an open-access repository [33].
References
[1] ASB Technical Report 033, Terms and Deﬁnitions in Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis, ﬁrst edition, Academy Standards Board, 2017.
[2] E.M.P. Williams, E.S. Graham, M.C. Jermy, D.C. Kieser, M.C. Taylor, The dynamics
of blood drop release from swinging objects in the creation of cast-off
bloodstain patterns, J. Forensic Sci. 64 (March (2)) (2019) 413–421 (in English).
[3] R.M. Arthur, J. Hoogenboom, M. Baiker, M.C. Taylor, K.G. De Bruin, An
automated approach to the classiﬁcation of impact spatter and cast-off
bloodstain patterns, Forensic Sci. Int. 289 (2018) 310–319.
[4] C.D. Adam, Experimental and theoretical studies into the release of blood
droplets from weapon tips, Forensic Sci. Int. 303 (October) (2019)109934 p. 11.
(in English).
[5] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics
in bloodstain pattern analysis: comparative review and research opportu-
nities, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (September (1-3)) (2013) 375–396.
[6] N. Kabaliuk, M.C. Jermy, E. Williams, T.L. Laber, M.C. Taylor, Experimental
validation of a numerical model for predicting the trajectory of blood drops in
typical crime scene conditions, including droplet deformation and breakup, with
a study of the effect of indoor air currents and wind on typical spatter drop
trajectories, Forensic Sci. Int. 245 (December) (2014) 107–120 (in English).
[7] S.N. Kunz, J. Adamec, C. Grove, Analyzing the dynamics and morphology of
cast-off pattern at different speed levels using high-speed digital video
imaging, J. Forensic Sci. 62 (March (2)) (2017) 428–434 (in English).
[8] T. Raymond, Crime scene reconstruction from bloodstains, Aust. J. Forensic Sci.
29 (2) (1997) 69–78 1997/07/01.
[9] E.M.P.T. Williams, Michael, The development and construction of a motorized
blood droplet generation device (BDGD), for detailed analysis of blood droplet
dynamics, J. Bloodstain Pattern Analy. 29 (2013).
[10] N. Behrooz, L. Hulse-Smith, S. Chandra, An evaluation of the underlying
mechanisms of bloodstain pattern analysis error, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (September
(5)) (2011) 1136–1142.
[11] U. Buck, B. Kneubuehl, S. Nather, N. Albertini, L. Schmidt, M. Thali, 3D
bloodstain pattern analysis: ballistic reconstruction of the trajectories of blood
drops and determination of the centres of origin of the bloodstains, Forensic
Sci. Int. 206 (March (1-3)) (2011) 22–28 (in English).
[12] F. Camana, Determining the area of convergence in Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis: a probabilistic approach, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (September (1-3))
(2013) 131–136.
[13] A.L. Carter, The directional analysis of bloodstain patterns theory and
experimental validation, Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. J. 34 (4) (2001) 173–189
2001/01/01.
[14] K.G. de Bruin, R.D. Stoel, J.C.M. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin
determination in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (November (6))
(2011) 1476–1482.
[15] N. Hakim, E. Liscio, Calculating point of origin of blood spatter using laser
scanning technology, J. Forensic Sci. 60 (March (2)) (2015) 409–417 (in
English).
[16] E. Liscio, P. Bozek, H. Guryn, Q. Le, Observations and 3D analysis of controlled
cast-off stains, J. Forensic Sci. 18 (February) (2020).
[17] A.C. Maloney T, J. Killeen, Visualization of cast-off patterns using 3D modelling
software, J. Associat. Crime Scene Reconstruct. 17 (4) (2011) 49–56.
[18] D. Attinger, P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, K. De Brabanter, Determining the region
of origin of blood spatter patterns considering ﬂuid dynamics and statistical
uncertainties, Forensic Sci. Int. 298 (May) (2019) 323–331 (in English).
[19] U. Windberger, A. Bartholovitsch, R. Plasenzotti, K.J. Korak, G. Heinze, Whole
blood viscosity, plasma viscosity and erythrocyte aggregation in nine
mammalian species: reference values and comparison of data, Exp. Physiol.
88 (3) (2003) 431–440.
[20] D. Attinger, Y. Liu, K. De Brabanter, Authors’ response, J. Forensic Sci. 8 (June)
(2020), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.14452.
[21] D. Attinger, Y. Liu, T. Bybee, K. De Brabanter, A data set of bloodstain patterns
for teaching and research in bloodstain pattern analysis: impact beating
spatters, Data Brief 18 (June) (2018) 648–654.
[22] E.Liscio,P. Bozek,H.Guryn,Q. Le,Observations and 3Danalysis of controlled cast-
off stains, J. Forensic Sci. 2020 (2020) (in English) Article; Early Access p. 13.
[23] J.R. Peiro, A.S. Borges, R.C. Goncalves, L.C.N. Mendes, Evaluation of a portable
clinical analyzer for the determination of blood gas partial pressures,
electrolyte concentrations, and hematocrit in venous blood samples collected
from cattle, horses, and sheep, Am. J. Vet. Res. 71 (May (5)) (2010) 515–521 (in
English).
[24] J.T. Zhang, A.C. Novak, B. Brouwer, Q.G. Li, Concurrent validation of Xsens MVN
measurement of lower limb joint angular kinematics, Physiol. Meas. 34
(August (8)) (2013) N63–N69.
[25] M. Capecci, M.G. Ceravolo, F. Ferracuti, S. Iarlori, S. Longhi, L. Romeo, S.N. Russi,
F. Verdini, Accuracy evaluation of the kinect v2 sensor during dynamic
movements in a rehabilitation scenario, in: J. Patton (Ed.), et al., 2016 38th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, IEEE, New York, 2016, pp. 5409–5412 (IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society Conference Proceedings).
[26] E. Lachat, H. Macher, M.A. Mittet, T. Landes, P. Grussenmeyer, First experiences
with kinect V2 sensor for close range 3D modelling, in: D. Gonzalez Aguilera, F.
Remondino, J. Boehm, T. Kersten, T. Fuse (Eds.), 3d-Arch 2015 - 3d Virtual
Reconstruction and Visualization of Complex Architectures, vol. 40-5,
Copernicus Gesellschaft Mbh, Gottingen, 2015, pp. 93–100 (International
Archives of the Photogrammetry Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
Sciences, no. W4).
[27] T.L. Heath, The Works of Archimedes, (1897) .
[28] R. Lachlan, The inscribed and the escribed circles, x126-128 in An Elementary
Treatise on Modern Pure Geometry, London Macmillan, 1893, pp. 72–74.
[29] A.V. Wouwer, P. Saucez, C. Vilas, Simulation of ODE/PDE models with MATLAB,
Octave and Scilab: Scientiﬁc and Engineering Applications, Springer, 2014.
[30] H.S.M. Coxeter, S.L. Greitzer, Geometry Revisited, Mathematical Association of
America, New York, 1967.
[31] V. Pratt, Direct least-squares ﬁtting of algebraic surfaces, Siggraph 21 (April
(4)) (1987) 145–152.
[32] J.C. Lagarias, J.A. Reeds, M.H. Wright, P.E. Wright, Convergence properties of the
Nelder-Mead simplex method in low dimensions, Siam J. Optim. 9 (1) (1998)
112–147.
[33] https://github.com/scottres/CastoffReconstruction.git. (Accessed 10 Decem-
ber 2020).
S. McCleary, E. Liscio, K. De Brabanter et al. 
Forensic Science International 319 (2021) 110628
11
