

--- PAGE 1 ---

High-speed video analysis of forward and backward spattered blood
droplets
P.M. Comiskeya, A.L. Yarina,*, D. Attingerb
a Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, 842 W. Taylor St., Chicago, IL 60607-7022, USA
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University, 2529 Union Dr., Ames, IA 60011-1210, USA
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 8 March 2017
Received in revised form 16 April 2017
Accepted 23 April 2017
Available online 1 May 2017
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Forward spatter
Backward spatter
Gunshot
High-speed video analysis
Particle image velocimetry
A B S T R A C T
High-speed videos of blood spatter due to a gunshot taken by the Ames Laboratory Midwest Forensics
Resource Center (MFRC) [1] are analyzed. The videos used in this analysis were focused on a variety of
targets hit by a bullet which caused either forward, backward, or both types of blood spatter. The analysis
process utilized particle image velocimetry (PIV) and particle analysis software to measure drop
velocities as well as the distributions of the number of droplets and their respective side view area. The
results of this analysis revealed that the maximal velocity in the forward spatter can be about 47  5 m/s
and for the backward spatter – about 24  8 m/s. Moreover, our measurements indicate that the number
of droplets produced is larger in forward spatter than it is in backward spatter. In the forward and
backward spatter the droplet area in the side-view images is approximately the same. The upper angles of
the close-to-cone domain in which droplets are issued in forward and backward spatter are, 27  9 and
57  7, respectively, whereas the lower angles of the close-to-cone domain are 28  12 and 30  18,
respectively. The inclination angle of the bullet as it penetrates the target is seen to play a large role in the
directional preference of the spattered blood. Also, muzzle gases, bullet impact angle, as well as the
aerodynamic wake of the bullet are seen to greatly inﬂuence the ﬂight of the droplets. The intent of this
investigation is to provide a quantitative basis for current and future research on bloodstain pattern
analysis (BPA) of either forward or backward blood spatter due to a gunshot.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
1. Introduction
Working for project No. 06-S-02 for the Midwest Forensics
Resource Center (MFRC), T.L. Laber, B.P. Epstein, and M.C. Taylor
took 
a 
series 
of 
over 
500 
high-speed 
videos 
of 
common
bloodletting mechanisms [2]. The set of videos includes blood
spatter formation due to a gunshot, blood spatter due to a blunt
object such as a hammer, or blood drop formation from a single
droplet and is located on the MFRC website [1]. In literature, the
videos have been referred to before [3–5], and are routinely used in
bloodstain pattern analysis (BPA) presentation and training classes.
However, a quantitative analysis of this dataset is still unavailable,
especially for the scenario of blood spatter due to a gunshot.
Accordingly, the aim of the present work is in quantitative analysis
of blood spatter induced by a gunshot to facilitate the BPA
community tools for scientiﬁc analysis of a crime scene event.
Blood is a complex non-Newtonian ﬂuid which is shear-
thinning [6–8], exhibits viscoelastic behavior [8–11] and possesses
a yield stress [12]. It is an aqueous suspension which contains
plasma and particles such as white and red blood cells, and
platelets. Blood starts to coagulate when it leaves the body or
under conditions of increased shear stress [13]. The rheology of
blood could affect the atomization process [14–16] which is of
fundamental importance for BPA because it determines the
distribution of drop sizes and velocities [17], thus the resulting
blood spatter. The atomization is diminished by the effects of
viscoelasticity [18–20], and the resulting size of the impacting
droplets can be heavily inﬂuenced by viscosity and elasticity of
liquid [21–26]. Therefore, an accurate crime scene reconstruction
from any crime involving blood spatter must account for the
rheological behavior of blood.
The uncertainties of different BPA techniques can be signiﬁcant,
up to a 50% overestimation of the height of the origin of a blood
spatter [5]. A better understanding of the mechanisms of
blood droplet formation and ﬂight is required. The ﬁrst theoretical
steps in this direction are already available [27]. Such efforts would
be signiﬁcantly facilitated by a thorough analysis of the available
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ayarin@uic.edu (A.L. Yarin).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2017.04.016
0379-0738/Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

experimental data, e.g. high-speed videos [4]. It should be
emphasized that some experimental simpliﬁcations do not neces-
sarily reﬂectthe realcrimescenesituations.Forexample,oftentimes,
human blood is substituted for swine blood for safety reasons, and
because of expected similarities in size and concentration of blood
cells, and in rheology [5,27], albeit it is deﬁnitely not a perfect
substitute [28]. Moreover, blood spatter found in some crime scenes
could be affected by the dynamic effect of muzzle gases from a
ﬁrearm which are signiﬁcant, especially when the gun is close to its
target [29]. Crime scene reconstruction after a gunshot is often
simpliﬁed by neglecting gravity and air drag, resulting in what is
called a straight-line assumption, or the method of strings [30–34].
Unsurprisingly, this assumption can be quite inaccurate [5,35,36]
and as a result, there is a permanent drive for more realistic models
[17,27,37–39]. Accordingly, in BPA research, it is imperative to
analyze all available sources of data. The MFRC videos are a treasure
trove of valuable information for numerous situations. As a result of
their untapped nature, they have gone relatively undetected as many
groups have attempted their own high-speed video analysis for their
speciﬁc problems at hand. This has the consequence of building
solutions which might work only for a limited set of problems. To
avoid such limitations, a general pattern must be analyzed, which is
the goal of the present work.
2. Experimental video analysis
The MFRC videos were produced from experiments performed
primarily at the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
Forensic Science Laboratory, in Minnesota, USA, with some
performed at the Christchurch Laboratory of the Institute of
Environmental 
Science 
and 
Research, in 
Christchurch, 
New
Zealand [2]. The camera used to record the experiments was a
Photron Fastcam-SA1 High-Speed Digital Video camera with most
videos using either a Tamron 90 mm macro lens, Micro Nikkor
55 mm, or Micro Nikkor 105 mm lens. Proper lighting was speciﬁc
to each experiment which resulted in a variety of apertures and
shutter speeds used to produce the highest quality videos possible.
Room temperature human blood with an anti-coagulant was used
within 72 h of the draw date for every experiment.
Of the series of over 500 videos, over 200 are posted on the
MFRC Blood Pattern Analysis Videos webpage, 19 of them are
directly related to blood spatter due to a gunshot, and four of those
show different muzzle discharges [1]. The targets consisted of a
blood soaked sponge, fabric covering the sponge, tape encompass-
ing the entire sponge, and a silicone-encased sponge. The targets
were placed at distances in the 1–182 cm range from the muzzle of
the gun. Of the 19 videos available for blood spatter induced by a
gunshot, ﬁve were chosen for a quantitative analysis with particle
image velocimetry (PIV) in the present work because they either
contained both forward and backward spatter, or, their spatter
pattern was resolved enough (in time and space) for an accurate
analysis. The ﬁve experiments used in this analysis are described in
Table 1.
Each frame of the high-speed videos were taken at time
intervals of 0.1 ms. In the present work, PIV analysis was conducted
to characterize the motion of the blood droplets. The PIV method
relies on recording the positions of ﬂuid particles (here droplets)
for two time instances in quick succession of the order of a
millisecond. Statistical correlation of the two images with the
position of the particles allows for the determination of the
velocity ﬁeld that is the spatial distribution of velocities. Here, PIV
is conducted from approximately the time the bullet impacted the
sponge to two milliseconds in each experiment. The program used
for PIV was PIVlab 1.41 which is an application built for the
numerical computing language MATLAB [40]. The analysis was
done with a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm with four
interrogation passes from 64, 32, 16, and ﬁnally 8 square pixels. A
linear interpolator was used with a Gauss 2  3-point sub-pixel
estimator and the contrast of each image was automatically locally
enhanced before processing. A region of interest mask of
100  200 pixels was drawn about a centimeter from the target
for back spatter, and half a centimeter from the target for forward
spatter. The dimensions for the region of interest were chosen so
that it would be sufﬁciently large enough to capture the created
spray of blood droplets, yet not too large as to increase the
likelihood of a false reading by including phantom vectors. The
location of the region of interest away from the target was dictated
by the distance at which droplets became recognizable, as it was
centered about the splash of blood droplets. Post-processing vector
validation was performed, in which physically impossible vectors
were deleted as outliers.
Each experiment was also analyzed for the area of each droplet,
measured as the area of the droplet in ﬂight as seen directly from
frames of the high-speed videos, and the number of droplets
located within a region of interest. This was done using ImageJ [41],
utilizing the particle analysis toolset. A rectangular region of
interest, 100  200 pixels large, was placed at approximately the
same respective location as done in the PIV tests. Each experiment
was analyzed at approximately 2 ms, a time which was chosen
because the droplets became very easily distinguishable from the
background. Automatic local thresholding was performed on each
image following the method of Phansalkar et al. [42] with a
thresholding radius of 15 pixels, k = 0.25, and r = 0.5. This converted
each image into a binary image which was then analyzed with the
particles toolset. There were no pixel-size limiting or circularity-
based restrictions imposed on the analysis.
3. Results and discussion
The PIV technique described in Section 2 was employed to ﬁnd
the velocity magnitude at the midplane of the region of interest,
parallel to the target face. For each time interval between the
frames of interest, the velocity magnitude along this midplane was
averaged and then these velocities were plotted against the time
reckoned from the bullet impact on the target. For the bare sponge
experiments number 7Aa1 and 7Ab1 from Table 1, this process
results in Fig. 1. These two experiments are directly comparable
with one another because they differ only in the caliber of bullet
used and both experiments resulted in forward and backward
spatter.
Fig. 1 shows that the larger caliber bullet used in experiment
7Ab1 results in an overall larger average velocity for both
Table 1
Experiments from the MFRC used in this analysis. The experiment number corresponds to a part of the title of a particular video on the MFRC website.
Experiment number 
Bullet caliber 
Target type 
Target distance [cm]
7Aa1 
.22 
Bare sponge 
182
7Ab1 
.44 
Bare sponge 
182
7Cb3 
.44 
Tape-covered sponge 
182
7Db1 
.44 
Silicone-covered sponge 
182
7Db2 
.44 
Silicone-covered sponge 
182
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141 
135


--- PAGE 3 ---

forwardand backward spattered droplets. The difference is
apparent from the ﬁrst data point of the analysis at a time from
the bullet impact in the 0.4–0.5 ms range, all the way to the end of
the experiment. For either caliber, the forward spattered velocity
is larger than that of the backward spattered velocity, even
though in Fig. 1a, the velocity gap is only noticeable starting at the
0.8–0.9 ms mark from the bullet impact time, which may be due
to a large number of droplets difﬁcult to resolve. A larger forward
spatter velocity makes physical sense due to the entraining effect
of the bullet traveling in the direction of the blood spatter. It is
also interesting to note that as the time from the bullet impact
increases, the standard deviation of the data, as indicated by the
error bars, decreases due to a more uniform ﬂow ﬁeld in the
corresponding part of the region of interest. The trend of the steep
gradient upward and steady decrease in average velocity (cf.
Fig. 1) indicates that at the onset of the analysis which was at
0.4 ms after the bullet impact, the blood droplets are accelerated.
This means (from the second law of Newton applied to an
individual droplet) that droplets analyzed at the onset of the PIV
analysis practically do not experience air drag but on the contrary,
are pulled forward by the aerodynamic wake of the fast moving,
small-sized, preceding droplets from the initial splash. This is
similar to the aerodynamic interaction of birds ﬂying in V
formation [43]. After about 0.6–0.9 ms, the blood droplets ﬁnally
begin to slow down due air drag, since at the later stage droplets
have already sufﬁciently separated and their mutual aerodynamic
interaction has been diminished. It should be emphasized that
not only in forward spatter droplets are initially accelerated but
also 
in 
the 
backward 
spatter 
(cf. 
Fig. 1). 
Therefore, 
this
acceleration cannot be attributed to the aerodynamic effect of
bullet preceding droplets in forward spatter but to the mutual
entrainment of droplets described above.
The tape-covered sponge of experiment 7Cb3 only produced
forward spattered droplets and the results from the PIV analysis
are shown in Fig. 2. Since the same bullet caliber and shooting
distance as in experiment 7Ab1 were used, the results in Fig. 2 can
be directly compared to the forward spatter case of Fig. 1b.
Covering the sponge with tape prevents the onset of backward
spatter. Due to the spread of the error bars, an accelerated droplet
motion due to the aerodynamic wake of the preceding droplets is
still plausible, however, it is not directly seen in Fig. 2. The
magnitude of the average velocity is approximately that of the
forward spattered case shown in Fig. 1b. The trend of a decrease in
the error bar spread at longer time is still seen, albeit to a lesser
extent.
The two experiments with silicone-covered sponges, 7Db1 and
7Db2, were conducted using the same caliber of bullet and the
same 
shooting 
distance. 
The 
results 
for 
the 
7Db1 
and
7Db2 experiments are presented in Fig. 3.
Even though experiments 7Db1 and 7Db2 were conducted under
exactly the same conditions as indicated in Table 1, 7Db1 only
resultedin forward spatter, whereas7Db2 revealedbothforwardand
backward spatter. This sheds light on the complexity of performing
repeatable BPA experiments: it means that for this set of
Fig. 1. PIV results for experiment 7Aa1 are shown in panel (a), and for experiment 7Ab1 in panel (b). The red dashed line with circular data points represents the results from
forward spatter, and the solid blue line with square data points is for backward spatter. The error bars are the standard deviations of the sets of data. Note that the data points
are slightly offset from their corresponding time reckoned from the bullet impact moment in order to more easily distinguish the error bars. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 2. PIV result for the forward spattered blood data of experiment 7Cb3. The error
bars are the standard deviation of the set of data.
136 
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141


--- PAGE 4 ---

experiments, there are some uncontrolled factors which result in
two very different outcomes. Upon careful inspection of the high-
speed videos, it seems that the silicone-encased sponge in
experiment 7Db2 held more blood. Even more critically, the
blood seems to have pooled to the backside of the target where
backward 
spatter 
would 
form. 
Therefore, 
the 
presence 
of
backward spatter in only one of these trials could simply be
explained by the undocumented blood ﬁlling process of the
silicone-encased sponge, or by gravity-driven transport of blood.
Regardless of this deﬁciency, Fig. 3b still reveals the important
result of a faster average blood velocity for forward spattered
droplets versus backward spattered droplets.
It should be emphasized that the PIV results shown in Figs. 1–3
do not contain data with the initial velocities of the droplets. All
data points were taken starting at 0.4 ms after the bullet impacted
the target (except for experiment 7Db1 where data started at
0.5 ms due to the inability to accurately resolve the droplets at an
earlier moment of time – the early frames are completely blurry).
The analysis was only conducted for the time interval when the
droplets became clear enough to get accurate results. Droplets
were formed before 0.4 ms, but with the current high-speed
videos, PIV cannot be utilized to measure their velocity. The high-
speed videos seem to show at least two regimes of the expulsion of
droplets, the ﬁrst of which has not been measured by PIV here. The
ﬁrst regime is a very fast moving spray which occurs almost
instantaneously after the impact. After about 0.4 ms, the second
regime begins to take place where the web of blood issued
from the target consists of recognizable droplets moving at a
much slower pace. An example of these two regimes can be seen in
Fig. 4 which is a frame taken from the high-speed video of
experiment 7Aa1.
As described in Section 2, the number of droplets was counted
with the particle analysis toolset of ImageJ within a region of
interest replicating the one used in the PIV analysis. The results for
the number of droplets in each experiment are shown in Fig. 5.
For the three experiments which contained both forward and
backward spattered droplets, there were always more forward
spattered droplets. In comparing experiments 7Aa1 and 7Ab1,
which differ only in the caliber of the bullet, experiment 7Ab1,
corresponding to the larger caliber, produced more droplets in
both forward and backward spatter. It also seems as if the
experiments with an open-faced bare sponge produce more
droplets overall when accounting for the experimental incon-
sistencies of 7Db1 and 7Db2.
Using the particle analysis toolset of ImageJ, the side view area
of each individual droplet can also be determined. An average of all
these values in each experiment is shown in Fig. 6
For 
the 
experiments 
which 
revealed 
both 
forward 
and
backward spattered droplets, there is an insigniﬁcant difference
between the average side view area of droplets in the case of a
bare sponge. The silicone-covered sponge in experiment of
7Db2 resulted in much larger backward spattered droplets, albeit
Fig. 3. Droplet velocities for experiment 7Db1 shown in panel (a), and 7Db2 shown in panel (b). The red dashed lines with circular data points represent the results for
forward spatter, and the solid blue line with square data points is for backward spatter. The error bars are the standard deviations of the set of data. Note that the data points
are once again slightly offset from their corresponding time from impact value in order to more easily distinguish the error bars. (For interpretation of the references to color
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 4. Cropped image of the backward spatter region of experiment 7Aa1 at 0.1 ms
after the bullet impact [1]. The two labels, R I and R II, represent the two regimes
found. The ﬁrst regime, R I, is where recognizable droplets which are relatively large
and travel relatively slowly begin to form; they were analyzed by PIV. Note, that as
time goes on, the boundary between R I and R II moves towards the right of the
image and at about 0.4 ms, individual droplets in R I are easy to resolve.
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141 
137


--- PAGE 5 ---

that might be due to the blood pooling towards that direction in
the sponge as discussed above.
Using the data from the high-speed videos of each experiment
at 0.5 ms after the bullet impact, the maximum angular spread of
the forward and backward spatter was established by drawing
tangents to the issued drop clouds near the target faces and
reckoning their angles from the bullet axis. This resulted in the
average upper angles of the close-to-cone domain in which
droplets are issued for the forward and backward spatter of 27  9
and 57  7, respectively, whereas the lower angles of the close-to-
cone domain are 28  12 and 30  18, respectively. The detailed
information on these angles is given in Fig. 7, with the lower semi-
angles shown as negative.
Fig. 7 shows that backward spattered droplets have a wider
spread angle than the forward spattered ones. The bare sponge
experiments 7Aa1 and 7Ab1 revealed an almost symmetric upper
and lower angles of the spatter domains in forward and backward
spatter. Such symmetry is less prominent in the other experiments
which indicates that covering a sponge with silicone or tape results
in an uneven distribution of droplets. This is important because
the initial droplet cloud signiﬁcantly determines their further
trajectories and shows that the effect of victim’s clothes may be
crucial for crime scene reconstruction. It should be emphasized
that blood droplets were seen to form from the target periphery
not penetrated by the bullet and continued to be formed long after
the bullet left the target. The above-mentioned angles correspond
to 0.5 ms after the bullet impact. However, they vary in time, albeit
not too much, i.e. staying close to the values shown in Fig. 7.
The effect of muzzle gases on the blood spattered droplets is
more pronounced in experiments where the distance between the
muzzle of the gun and target was short. An example of this is
shown 
in 
a 
high-speed 
video 
not 
analyzed 
above, 
whose
experiment number was 7Aa7 which was a .22 cal bullet impacting
a blood-impregnated sponge at 50 cm. Several frames of this video
are shown in Fig. 8.
While the motion of the muzzle gases is difﬁcult to discern in
the still images, it is clearly visible in the video. The effect of the
muzzle gases is the following: as time progresses, the droplets do
not only move outward from the surface of the sponge, but are also
entrained by muzzle gases impinging onto the sponge and turn
towards the left, which is against gravity and against backward
spatter motion. This phenomena has been discussed in literature
before [29], and clearly should not be ignored.
Two more observations worth noting were made when viewing
the selection of MFRC videos. Both of them are revealed in the
forward spattered section of experiment 7Db2, of which a series of
four video frames are shown in Fig. 9.
First, note that the angle of the bullet coming out of the target is
not normal to the target face. The forward spattered droplets seem
to follow the axis of penetration and as a result, they travel at a
downward angle of inclination. Note that this trend is opposite to
what is seen for backward spattered droplets in Fig. 8. For that
Fig. 5. The number of droplets in the PIV region of interest for each experiment. The
red bars with negatively sloped crosshatching are for the forward spatter and the
blue bars with positively sloped crosshatching are for backward spattered. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 6. Average side view area of the droplets in all experimental cases. The red
triangles represent forward spattered droplets and the blue squares represent the
backward spattered ones. The error bars show the standard deviation. For
experiment 7Db1, the error bar for the area about 0.75 mm2 is too wide to be
included in full in this frame. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 7. Spread angles of the close-to-cone domain in which droplet clouds are issued
at 0.5 ms. The dashed line is the axis of symmetry of the bullet, the red bars
correspond to the forward spatter and the blue bars to the backward spatter. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)
138 
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141


--- PAGE 6 ---

experiment, the bullet traveled horizontally, parallel to the ﬂoor,
and therefore impacted the sponge target at an angle. The
backward spattered droplets are then issued normally to the face
of the target, not in preference with the axis of the bullet as seen in
forward spatter in Fig. 9.
The ﬁnal important observation in Fig. 9 is that the issued blood
droplets do not continue to travel as their initial trajectory would
tend to suggest. For example, looking at the top grouping of
droplets in Fig. 9b, notice that they move downward towards the
centerline of where the bullet was in Fig. 9c, and then they
continue to move in that direction as indicated in Fig. 9d. The same
phenomena happen with the bottom grouping of droplets in
Fig. 9b, except in reverse. This means that the droplets initially
traveling upwards, end up projected downwards, and vice versa for
the group initially traveling downwards. The process may be
difﬁcult to visualize with only four frames of experiment 7Db2, but
it is clearly visible in the MFRC video online. This phenomena can
occur because of two possibilities. First, it might be that the
aerodynamic wake forming behind the bullet is causing the
droplets to spiral about the axis of penetration, a process which
would be very difﬁcult to see from this viewpoint and might
manifest itself as this artifact. Second, the low pressure zone
within the wake of the bullet may be causing the droplets to travel
opposite to their initial direction. With the current set of MFRC
videos, it is impossible to accurately deduce a reason. It should be
emphasized that in the other videos used in this analysis which
Fig. 8. Frames from experiment 7Aa7 where panel (a) corresponds to 2.4 ms, (b) 6.4 ms, (c) 7.9 ms, and (d) 9.4 ms after the horizontally traveling bullet impacted the inclined
sponge [1].
Fig. 9. Frames from the forward spattered portion of experiment 7Db2 [1]. Panel (a)
is 0.2 ms, (b) 0.8 ms, (c) 1.1 ms, and (d) 1.5 ms after the bullet impacted the silicon-
encased sponge target.
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141 
139


--- PAGE 7 ---

contained forward spatter, this phenomena were only observed in
experiment 7Db2.
4. Conclusion
Five different videos from the MFRC were quantitatively
analyzed with PIV and droplet detection software. The videos
are freely available to the public [1] as well as the droplet detection
software used which was ImageJ. A toolset called analyze particles
was used after the image was converted to binary with the use of a
standard, automatic local thresholding method. The PIV software
was PIVlab 1.41 which is a free application that works within the
MATLAB environment [40]. The average velocity of both forward
spattered and backward spattered droplets, number of droplets,
and average side view area were found.
When comparing experiment numbers 7Aa1 and 7Ab1, it was
observed that a larger caliber bullet results in more, faster, and larger
droplets in both forward and backward spatter. Covering the blood-
impregnated sponge target with tape, as was done in experiment
7Cb3, reduced the amount of droplets created, and only produced
forward spatter. These droplets were of about the same size as in the
experiment with a comparable bullet size, 7Ab1. The average spread
angles of the close-to-cone domain of the droplet cloud in the
forward and backward spatter for the upper domain were measured
as 27  9 and 57  7, respectively, whereas for the lower domain
they were 28  12 and 30  18, respectively. Encasing the sponge in
silicone produced mixed results which may be attributed to the
blood ﬁlling process of the sponge. It was also noted that the blood
spatter experiments clearly produced two regimes of spatter. In one
of the regimes, a ﬁne mist which traveled rapidly and was created
immediately after the bullet impacted the target. In another regime
larger droplets propagated much slower, and within this regime the
analysis contained in this work was performed. The inclination angle
of the spattered blood droplets was seen to be inﬂuenced by the
impact angle of the bullet which is not the case for backward
spattered droplets. Additionally, the effect of muzzle gas was
prominent and the aerodynamic wake of the bullet may inﬂuence
the trajectory of the blood spatter.
It was found that in both forward and backward spatter, the
droplets analyzed with PIV were moving with an acceleration. This
is because those droplets which constitute a dense cloud
practically do not experience air drag, and on the contrary are
pulled forward by the aerodynamic wake of the preceding droplets
spattered initially, at earlier time moments. This effect is similar to
the aerodynamic interaction of birds ﬂying in V formation. Only at
the later stage when droplets are sufﬁciently separated, their
mutual aerodynamic interaction has been diminished and they
started to experience aerodynamic drag and decelerate. The MFRC
video database, despite its limits in space and time resolution,
contain an immense information that can facilitate the develop-
ment of BPA models.
Note that the videos analyzed were chosen from the entire
MFRC database because they were of high enough quality to
extract reliable information on the physical mechanisms of
backward and forward blood spatter. It should be emphasized
that there is no known recording of the volume of blood which was
used in each experiment. From viewing the videos, however, it is
clear that a sufﬁcient amount of blood was soaked into the sponge
target because blood stains several times larger than the impacting
bullet are clearly visible. Nevertheless, in this work we showed that
even with such limited accompanying information, the database is
a rich source for the exploration of the physical mechanisms of
blood spatter aimed in the present work.
The physical aspects of the process which we were able to
establish in this work facilitate and conﬁrm the foundations of the
detailed numerical models recently developed in Ref. [27], which
describe in detail velocities, sizes and trajectories of blood drops
formed in back spatter after a gunshot, as well as their impact
angles and velocities, and the stain size they form.
Funding
Financial support for this work was provided by the United
States National Institute of Justice (award NIJ 2014-DN-BX-K036).
References
[1] Ames Laboratory Midwest Forensics Resource Center, MFRC Blood Pattern
Analysis Videos. https://www.ameslab.gov/mfrc/bpa-videos. (Accessed Janu-
ary 2017).
[2] T.L. Laber, B.P. Epstein, M.C. Taylor, High speed digital video analysis of
bloodstain pattern formation from common bloodletting mechanisms, I.A.B.P.
A. News (June) (2008) 4–12.
[3] S.K. Bandyopadhyay, N. Basu, Review of common bloodstain patterns
documented at a crime scene in the event of blunt force hit, Am. J. Comput.
Sci. Inf. Technol. 3 (2015) 45–63.
[4] W. Ristenpart, F. Tulleners, S. Siu, J. Saifu, F. Springer, Quantitative Analysis of
High Velocity Bloodstain Patterns, National Institute of Justice Final Technical
Report, (2013), pp. 1–86 April.
[5] N. Behrooz, L. Hulse-Smith, S. Chandra, An evaluation of the underlying
mechanisms of bloodstain pattern analysis error, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (2011)
1136–1142.
[6] S. De Gruttola, K. Boomsma, D. Poulikakos, Computational simulation of a non-
Newtonian model of the blood separation process, Artif. Org. 29 (2005)
949–959.
[7] S. Charm, G. Kurland, Viscometry of human blood for shear rates of
0–100,000 sec1, Nature 4984 (1965) 617–618.
[8] A. Kolbasov, P.M. Comiskey, R.P. Sahu, S. Sinha-Ray, A.L. Yarin, B.S. Sikarwar, S.
Kim, T.Z. Jubery, D. Attinger, Blood rheology in shear and uniaxial elongation,
Rheol. Acta 55 (2016) 901–908.
[9] S. Chien, R.G. King, R. Skalak, S. Usami, A.L. Copley, Viscoelastic properties of
human blood and red cell suspensions, Biorheology 12 (1975) 341–346.
[10] A.L. Copley, R.G. King, S. Chien, S. Usami, R. Skalak, C.R. Huang, Microscopic
observations of viscoelasticity of human blood in steady and oscillatory shear,
Biorheology 12 (1975) 257–263.
[11] M. Brust, C. Schaefer, R. Doerr, L. Pan, M. Garcia, P.E. Arratia, C. Wagner,
Rheology of human blood plasma: viscoelastic versus Newtonian behavior,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 078305.
[12] C. Picart, J.M. Piau, H. Galliard, P. Carpentier, Human blood shear yield stress
and its hematocrit dependence, J. Rheol. 42 (1998) 1–12.
[13] J.J. Hathcock, Flow effects on coagulation and thrombosis, Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 26 (2006) 1729–1737.
[14] S.P. Lin, R.D. Reitz, Drop and spray formation from a liquid jet, Annu. Rev. Fluid
Mech. 30 (1998) 85–105.
[15] J. Eggers, E. Villermaux, Physics of liquid jets, Rep. Prog. Phys. 71 (2008)
036601.
[16] A.L. Yarin, Free Liquid Jets and Films: Hydrodynamics and Rheology, Longman
Scientiﬁc & Technical and John Wiley & Sons, Harlow, New York, 1993.
[17] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics
in bloodstain pattern analysis: comparative review and research opportu-
nities, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (2013) 375–396.
[18] C. Clasen, J. Bico, V.M. Entov, G.H. McKinley, ‘Gobbling drops’: the jetting-
dripping transition in ﬂows of polymer solutions, J. Fluid Mech. 636 (2009)
5–40.
[19] D.D. Joseph, J. Belanger, G.S. Beavers, Breakup of a liquid drop suddenly
exposed to a high-speed airstream, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 25 (1999)
1263–1303.
[20] F. Mighri, P.J. Carreau, A. Ajji, Inﬂuence of elastic properties on drop
deformation and breakup in shear ﬂow, Soc. Rheol. 42 (1998) 1477–1490.
[21] A.L. Yarin, Drop impact dynamics: splashing, spreading, receding, bouncing .
. . , Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 38 (2006) 159–192.
[22] M. Rein, Phenomena of liquid drop impact on solid and liquid surfaces, Fluid
Dyn. Res. 12 (1993) 61–93.
[23] V. Bertola, An experimental study of bouncing Leidenfrost drops: comparison
between Newtonian and viscoelastic liquids, Int. J. Heat Mass Tranf. 52 (2009)
1786–1793.
[24] T. Jiang, J. Ouyang, B. Yang, J. Ren, The SPH method for simulating a viscoelastic
drop impact and spreading on an inclined plate, Comput. Mech. 45 (2010)
573–583.
[25] J.J. Cooper-White, R.C. Crooks, D.V. Boger, A drop impact study of worm-like
viscoelastic surfactant solutions, Coll. Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 210
(2002) 105–123.
[26] A. Carre, J.C. Gastel, M.E.R. Shanahan, Viscoelastic effects in the spreading of
liquids, Nature 379 (1996) 432–434.
[27] P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, S. Kim, D. Attinger, Prediction of blood back spatter
from a gunshot in bloodstain pattern analysis, Phys. Rev. Fluids 1 (2016)
043201.
140 
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141


--- PAGE 8 ---

[28] U. Windberger, A. Bartholovitsch, R. Plasenzotti, K.J. Korak, G. Heinze, Whole blood
viscosity, plasma viscosity and erythrocyte aggregation in nine mammalian
species: reference values andcomparison of data, Exp. Physiol.88(2003) 431–440.
[29] M.C. Taylor, T.L. Laber, B.P. Epstein, D.S. Zamzow, D.P. Baldwin, The effect of
ﬁrearm muzzle gases on the backspatter of blood, Int. J. Legal Med. 125 (2010)
617–628.
[30] M.B. Illes, A.L. Carter, P.L. Laturnus, A.B. Yamashita, Use of BackTrackTM
computer program for bloodstain pattern analysis of stains from downward-
moving drops, J. Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. 38 (2005) 213–217.
[31] A.L. Carter, The directional analysis of bloodstain patterns: theory and
experimental validation, J. Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. 34 (2001) 173–189.
[32] R. Kanable, BackTrack going forward, Law Enforc. Technol. (August) (2006) 40.
[33] A.L. Carter, J. Forsythe-Erman, V. Hawkes, A.B. Yamashita, Validation of the
BackTrackTM suite of programs for bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic
Identif. 56 (2006) 242–254.
[34] A.L. Carter, M. Illes, K. Maloney, A.B. Yamashita, B. Allen, B. Brown, L. Davidson,
G. Ellis, J. Gallant, A. Gradkowski, J. Hignell, S. Jory, P.L. Laturnus, C.C. Moore, R.
Pembroke, A. Richard, R. Spenard, C. Stewart, Further validation of the
BackTrackTM computer program for bloodstain pattern analysis: precision and
accuracy, Int. Assoc. Bloodstain Pattern Anal. News 21 (2005) 15–22.
[35] W.F. Rowe, Errors in the determination of the point of origin of bloodstains,
Forensic Sci. Int. 161 (2006) 47–51.
[36] K.G. de Bruin, R.D. Stoel, J.C.M. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin
determination in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (2011)
1476–1482.
[37] N. Behrooz, Bloodstain pattern analysis for determination of point of origin, B.
S., thesis, University of Toronto, 2009.
[38] C.R. Varney, F. Gittes, Locating the source of projectile ﬂuid droplets, Am. J.
Phys. 79 (2011) 838–842.
[39] N. Laan, K.G. de Bruin, D. Slenter, J. Wilhelm, M. Jermy, D. Bonn, Bloodstain
pattern analysis: implementation of a ﬂuid dynamic model for position
determination of victims, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 11461.
[40] W. Thielicke, E.J. Stamhuis, PIVlab-Time Resolved Digital Particle Image
Velocimetry Tool for MATLAB (v 1.41), (2014), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/
m9.ﬁgshare.1092508.
[41] C.A. Schneider, W.S. Rasband, K.W. Eliceiri, NIH image to ImageJ: 25 years of
image analysis, Nat. Methods 9 (2012) 671–675.
[42] N. Phansalkar, S. More, A. Sabale, M. Joshi, Adaptive local thresholding for
detection of nuclei in diversly stained cytology images, Communications and
Signal Processing (ICCSP), 2011 International Conference on. IEEE (2011)
218–220.
[43] P.B.S. Lissaman, C.A. Shollenberger, Formation ﬂight of birds, Science 168
(1970) 1003–1005.
P.M. Comiskey et al. / Forensic Science International 276 (2017) 134–141 
141
