

--- PAGE 1 ---

Determining the region of origin of blood spatter patterns considering
ﬂuid dynamics and statistical uncertainties
Daniel Attingera,*, Patrick M. Comiskeyb, Alexander L. Yarinb, Kris De Brabanterc,d
a Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University, 50010 Ames, IA, USA
b Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, 842 W Taylor St., Chicago, IL 60607-7022, USA
c Department of Statistics, Iowa State University, 50010 Ames, IA, USA
d Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, 50010 Ames, IA, USA
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 24 September 2018
Received in revised form 23 January 2019
Accepted 5 February 2019
Available online 15 February 2019
Keywords:
Bloodstain pattern analysis
Ballistic
Reconstruction
Fluid dynamics
Probabilities
Uncertainty propagation
A B S T R A C T
Trajectory reconstruction in bloodstainpattern analysis is currently performed by assuming that blood drop
trajectoriesare straight along directions inferred from stain inspection. Recently, several attempts have been
made at reconstructing ballistic trajectories backwards, considering the effects of gravity and drag forces.
Here, we propose a method toreconstructthe regionof origin ofimpact bloodspatterpatternsthat considers
ﬂuid dynamics and statistical uncertainties. The ﬂuid dynamics relies on deﬁning for each stain a range of
physically possible trajectories, based on known physics of how drops deform, both in ﬂight and upon
slanted impact. Statistical uncertainties are estimated and propagated along the calculations, and a
probabilistic approach is used to determine the region of origin as a volume most compatible with the
backward trajectories. A publicly available data set of impact spatter patterns on a vertical wall with various
impactor velocities and distances to target is used to test the model and evaluate its robustness, precision,
and accuracy. Results show that the proposed method allows reconstruction of bloodletting events with
distances between thewall andblood source largerthan 1 m. The uncertaintyof themethod is determined,
and its dependency on the distance between the blood source and the wall is characterized. Causes of error
and uncertainty are discussed. The proposed method allows the consideration of stains indicating impact
velocities that point downwards, which are typically not used for determining the height of the origin. Based
on the proposed method, two practical recommendations on crime scene documentation are drawn.
© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V.
1. Introduction
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (BPA) is one of many techniques of
forensic science and crime scene investigation [1,2]. Besides the
determination of the mechanisms causing speciﬁc collections of
stains (patterns), BPA also aims at reconstructing blood spatter
patterns — patterns generated by impact of airborne drops on a
target surface. For spatter patterns, the determination of the 3D
location of the spatter producing event  the region of origin  is
relevant to criminal cases. Note that the term region of origin used
throughout the manuscript departs from current standards [3] in
BPA, which recommend area of origin. We ﬁnd that term confusing
because of its 2D technical meaning, while the origin of a spatter is
clearly a 3D region of space which the work in this manuscript
identiﬁes and measure as a volume. As translated from the 1939
extensive and seminal BPA study of Balthazard et al., “The problem
of reconstructing curved trajectories is very difﬁcult to solve” [4].
Indeed, proper backward reconstruction of the trajectory of a
single drop relies on the determination of the three impact velocity
components, as well as the drop volume, the latter necessary for
the consideration of drag forces along the trajectory.
Backward trajectory reconstruction typically involves the
following steps: (1) the inspection of the roughness, cleanliness
and wickability of the target surface, the surface where the stains
are located; (2) the selection of a sufﬁcient and tractable number of
stains out of many (sometimes more than 10,000 [5]) blood stains
at the target surface; (3) the measurement of size, shape and
orientation of those stains; (4) the inference of impact conditions
based on measurements in (3); and (5) the backward reconstruc-
tion of drop trajectories compatible with the stains and impact
conditions; and (6) the identiﬁcation of a region of origin in 3D
space. Current trajectory reconstruction methods [6] are called the
method of strings or the tangent method, and assume that blood
drops travel in straight trajectories from the area of origin to the
target surface. Software based on same method and assumptions is
available and used in crime scenes [7,8].
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: attinger@iastate.edu (D. Attinger).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2019.02.003
0379-0738/© 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Forensic Science International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locat e/f orsciint


--- PAGE 2 ---

It is commonly understood that the assumption of straight
trajectories is not expected to induce systematic errors in the
determination of the region of convergence, which we deﬁne as in
[9,10], as the projection of the region of origin on a horizontal
surface (e.g. the ﬂoor). Some analysts determine the region of
convergence in the plane of the spatter pattern, which can be of
any orientation, but like the two well-cited works above, we use a
horizontal plane where the projections of the trajectories are not
affected by gravity. Certainly, methods neglecting gravity and drag
forces cause systematic errors in the height determination of the
region of origin [11,12]. For instance, [13] showed experimentally
that doing so “over-estimates the point of origin and the error
associated with this technique is signiﬁcant (50% on average).”
Such error is signiﬁcant enough to wrongly conclude that a person
was standing when in fact they may have been sitting. The
magnitude of this error is difﬁcult to estimate, because it arises
from the use of a physically inconsistent model. It has been
conjectured in [14] that “a satisfactory reconstruction” is achieved
using straight trajectories if the region of origin is determined
“within the volume of a grapefruit, or even a basketball”, but there
is no universally accepted method to determine the uncertainty
associated with the method of strings.
Here, we focus on the common situation where the spatter
pattern is found on a vertical wall, as depicted in Fig. 1. A
description of the method of strings for stains on a vertical wall is
given by Carter [9].
Recently, a probabilistic approach has been proposed by Camana
[10] to determine the region of convergence. The method relies on
the propagation of measurement uncertainties to the horizontal
projections of the trajectories, and constructs a joint probability
density function describing the probability that convergence would
be within a given spatial region. Of interest is that the method
generates a probabilistic map for the area of convergence, directly
linking the angles of impact and their uncertainties, to the region of
convergence and its area. In other words, [10] proposes for the ﬁrst
time a rational method to estimate the magnitude of the uncertainty
around the most likely point of convergence. The ability to rationally
provide the uncertainty of a measurement is an important
component in expert testimony.
In parallel, several approaches have been proposed to consider
the effects of drag and gravity on the backward trajectories in BPA.
Buck et al. [15] reconstructed drop trajectories with a modiﬁed
ballistic model, considering gravity and drag forces. In their ballistic
analysis, they screened a range of velocity values for compatibility
with the preservation of the drop during the ﬂight, since higher
velocities result in drop breakup when drag forces overcome the
surface tension. While an incorrect assumption on the ﬂuid
dynamics of drop impact associated with their analysis is discussed
in [16], the present work is inspired by their work. A statistical
procedure [17] based on aggregate statistics and basic equations of
projectile motion has been shown to determine the region of origin
of a blood spatter pattern for cases when the spatter is launched
within a narrow range of polar angles — which is the case in, e.g.
arterial gushing, but not in beatings or shootings [18]. Attinger et al.
[11] proposed a method to reconstruct the ballistic trajectory of a
blood drop considering gravity and drag forces. By measuring the
volume and shape of the bloodstain on the substrate, the diameter
and the velocity of the original drop could be estimated. Such a
method was implemented in [19,20], independently. While
theoretically portable to crimes scenes, that approach is of limited
use, because it requires a high-resolution 3D scanning of blood-
stains, surfaces which are both non-absorbing and with roughness
signiﬁcantly smaller than typical stain thickness (10–100 mm). Also,
stains are assumed not to contain internal voids, an assumption that
is not always correct [4]. Very recently, Comiskeyet al. [21] proposed
a method to predict trajectories resulting from gunshot spatter
patterns, accounting for the effect of air entrainment in the cloud of
atomized drops and the aerodynamic drop-drop interaction. While
the latter effect might be important near the origin, it is not clear at
this time how this time-forward method can be used to reconstruct
trajectories backward in time.
In this manuscript, we extend the probabilistic approach of
Camana [10], aimed at ﬁnding the region of convergence of a blood
spatter pattern in a 2D space, to the determination of the region of
origin in a 3D space. The core idea of the proposed method is as
follows: for each stain of interest, impact angles are estimated from
the orientation and ellipticity of the stain. Then, ﬂuid dynamics
arguments determine a ﬁnite range of possible impact conditions (as
proposed in [15]) in terms of pairs of drop diameters and velocities,
which correspond to a ﬁnite range of possible backward trajectories.
Those ﬂuid dynamics arguments consider drop deformation and
breakup during ﬂight and impact, the latter being visible by
inspection of the periphery of the stain. Then, we statistically
identify a 3D region from which the physically sound trajectories
mostprobablyoriginate.Thatregioniscalledtheregionoforigin,and
deﬁned not as a point but as a series of nested volumes. Those
volumes can be represented as a set of Russian dolls, the smaller
internal ones corresponding to a region of origin determined with a
lower probability than the larger ones. Analogous to [10], the
proposed method propagates measurement uncertainties and
determines the volume of the region of origin based on ﬂuid
dynamics and statistics, for the spatter pattern of interest.
Hereafter, we describe the method mathematically, and apply it
to published blood spatter pattern data [5] on vertical walls.
2. Methods
2.1. Blood preparation and other experimental details
The blood preparation and experimental methods are described
in detail in the published, open-source data set [5] of impact
blood spatter patterns and are only brieﬂy discussed here. Namely,
blood spatter patterns were generated by impact of either a
Fig. 1. The problem at hand is the determination of the region of origin of a blood
spatter pattern on a vertical wall. The coordinate system used in this manuscript
is mentioned, with subscript “o” indicating the origin of the blood, and “0” being
the origin of the coordinate trihedron. Indicated are the region of origin – the
location where the blood was atomized – and its projection on a horizontal plane,
the region of convergence.
324 
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331


--- PAGE 3 ---

cylindrical or a ﬂat surface on a 1 mL pool of blood resting on
another ﬂat surface.Such processes generate spatter patterns similar
to those generated during beating incidents or when stepping in
puddles of blood. Spatter patterns were produced on vertical targets
consistingofassembledﬂatverticalcardstock sheetswith atotal area
up to 1.5 m2. The target was placed on the front wall (x = 0) of a room
where the air was quiescent. The geometry and coordinate system of
the experiment are illustrated in Fig. 1.
The blood was less than two days old, from healthy swine, and
gently rocked before the experiment. The temperature, anticoagu-
lant and hematocrit are mentioned in [5]. The generated spatter
patterns were scanned at a high resolution of 600 DPI. In
comparison with photography with a high-end camera, scanning
offers a higher resolution and suppresses parallax error.
A wide range of horizontal distances (xo = 30 cm to 190 cm)
were considered between the target and the blood source. The
other parameter that varied during the experiments was the speed
of impact (2–9 m/s). Possibly, spatter patterns generated with a
larger amount of blood, or with different mechanisms such as
gunshot, a rat trap or a shoe step, would have resulted in different
size distributions and spatial distributions of stains.
2.2. Trajectory reconstruction process
The method described in this paper is based on ﬂuid dynamics
and probability theory. The following sections describe the
physical and probabilistic modeling involved in the proposed
method, and its implementation.
2.2.1. Fluid Dynamics
There is a wide body of engineering literature describing the
trajectories of ﬂying drops, in relation to, e.g., inkjet printing [11], fuel
injection [22], or raindrops [23]. The trajectories of ﬂying drops are
described with an equation of motion based on Newton’s law:
md
d~V
dt ¼md~g ~
FD: 
ð1Þ
Above, md; t; ~V ; ~g ; ~
FD are the drop mass, time, drop velocity,
gravity acceleration and drag force, respectively. It is assumed that
the air is quiescent, and that the interactions between drops are
negligible. Lift forces are also neglected — those would matter if the
drop spins and such information is unavailable at the time of
reconstruction.
To calculate the equation of motion (1), it is necessary to
estimate the drag caused by the air on the travelling droplet. The
drag force is deﬁned as in [11],
~
FD ¼ raCD
Ad
2
~V V; 
ð2Þ
where ra; Ad ; V and ~V are the air density, the cross-sectional area
of the undeformed droplet (Ad = pD2/4), the velocity magnitude,
and velocity vector of the droplet, respectively. The dimensionless
parameter CD is a drag coefﬁcient for an isolated spherical particle,
modiﬁed to account for the signiﬁcant particle deformation that
occurs at intermediate Weber numbers, as described in the
Supplementary documentation.
Determining the region of origin implies backward trajectory
reconstruction using Eq. (1). To do so, it is necessary to determine
the impact conditions, which are the drop size D, and the impact
velocity [11]. The impact velocity can be expressed with three
orthogonal velocity components ~V ¼
u
v
w
0
@
1
A, or (as done here) with
a scalar measure of the velocity magnitude and two angles deﬁning
its direction. The scalar measure is either the magnitude of the
velocity vector, V, or that of its component normal to the wall, u .
The two angles are the directional angle g , measured clockwise
from a vertical line to the major axis of an ellipse ﬁtted on the
bloodstain, and the impact angle which is estimated as,
a ﬃ arcsinðW=LÞ; 
ð3Þ
with L and W the respective length and width of an ellipse ﬁtted to
the stain.
To determine the remaining impact conditions, we ﬁrst note
that for any given stain, the impact velocity is not independent of
the drop diameter. Indeed, a relation between normal impact
velocity, u and drop diameter, D can be established from a ﬂuid
dynamic correlation between the amount of spreading of a drop
into a stain and its impact conditions. Based on dimensional
analysis, the above relation can be expressed [24] in the way
proposed by Bousﬁeld and Scheller [25,26],
b ¼ W=D ¼ a Re2
NOh
 
b
ð4Þ
Above, b is the spread factor expressing how much the drop
spreads upon impact. It is deﬁned as the ratio of stain width over
drop diameter. The coefﬁcients are speciﬁc to the impact surface,
for the cardstock used in this study, a = 0.257 and b = 0.235 [27]; the
Reynolds number, ReN ¼ ruD=m, measures the ratio of the blood
inertia normal to the impact surface to the viscous forces inside the
drop, and the Ohnesorge number, Oh ¼ m=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rDs
p
, scales the
viscous and surface tension forces. Symbols r,m, and s are the
density, 
viscosity, 
and 
surface 
tension 
of 
the 
blood 
drop,
respectively, and u is the velocity component normal to the target.
The above Correlation (4), can be rewritten to express the velocity,
u, as an explicit function of drop diameter, D, for a given β, as,
u ¼
b
a
  1
2b
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m
ﬃﬃﬃs
p
p
ðrDÞ
3=4
: 
ð5Þ
Typically, the spread factor β is within a range of 1.25–6, which
corresponds to impacts with very large and very low deformations
reviewed in the literature [28]. For any given stain, any trial value
βtrial within the above range is compatible with the ﬂuid dynamics
of the impact; together with the measured stain size and impact
angle, βtrial corresponds to a trial impact velocity u of a droplet and
a trial diameter D by Eqs. (4) and (5), respectively. Thus, for any
measured stain, βtrial determines a possible impact condition (Dtrial,
utrial, a; g), so that a trial trajectory can be calculated by integrating
the equation of motion (Eq. (1)) backward in time.
Note that the above approach assumes that a set of trial
trajectories is issued from each stain, in the manner of [15], and
that this set is determined by the range of possible trial values of
the spread factor. A ﬁrst step to reduce the uncertainty on the
region of origin is therefore to restrict the possible range of values
of the spread factor. Two physical criteria are applied to do so,
effectively eliminating non-physical trajectories:
1) Flight breakup criterion: ﬂying drops can break-up when the
aerodynamic drag forces acting on the drop exceed the cohesive
surface tension forces. A measure of the ratio of the inertial
forces to the surface tension forces is the Weber number based
on the density of the air ra. Thus the condition that no break-up
occurs along the trajectory is expressed as,
Wea ¼ raDV2
s
< K; 
ð6Þ
where V is the maximum velocity along the trajectory from the
stain to the region above the area of convergence. The critical
Weber number K for drop breakup in ﬂight is set to 13,
consistently with extensive experimental studies by Hsiang and
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331 
325


--- PAGE 4 ---

Faeth [29]. This criterion serves as an upper bound for the
allowable velocity of a trial trajectory.
2) Stain shape criterion: a second criterion is based on the stain
periphery being compatible with the deformation occurring of
the moving drop upon impact on a rigid target. It has been shown
that upon normal impact [30] when inertial forces are negligible
with respect to surface tension forces, the periphery of a blood
stain is a smooth circle. For impacts with higher inertia, of
magnitude comparable to surface tension, the periphery of the
stain exhibits deformation such as waves or spines. Further
increase of impact inertia induces splashing [31], visible in [30],
where tiny “splashed” stains surround the leading edge of the
mainstain. Thismorphological transition,fromsmoothtowavyto
splashed stain boundary, was already observed in 1939 [4] for
normal and oblique impacts. While its use for trajectory
reconstruction was considered at the time, it has never been
successfully implemented, probably because of the abundance of
parameters inﬂuencing the transition (angle of impact, impact
velocity, drop size, substrate roughness). Recently, Bird et al. [32]
described the related transition from smooth drop boundary to
splashing for the more complex case of oblique impact, in a phase
diagram with axes deﬁned in terms of only two dimensionless
impact numbers. The description of physical transitions with
dimensionless numbers is typical of ﬂuid dynamics, and allows
one to describe a phenomenon, here the shape transition at the
edge of drops occurring upon impact, with less variables. This
reduction of the number of variables thus transforms the
intractable problem identiﬁed in [4] into a tractable one.
The ﬁrst dimensionless number, WenRe1=2
n
, can be considered as
a measure of the ratio of inertial forces – which drive the impact,
over the viscous and surface tension forces – which resist the
impact. The second dimensionless number, Vt=Vn
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ren
p
, is the ratio
of the tangential impact velocity over the normal impact velocity,
scaled by the Reynolds number term. It accounts for the effect of
angular impact, which typically enhances the tendency to splash at
the leading edge of the droplet, and reduces it at its trailing edge.
Indeed, experiments done for this work, using the blood and target
material of interest, show that the two dimensionless numbers of
[32] can be used to associate blood stain shapes with impact
conditions, as in the phase diagram of Fig. 2. That ﬁgure exhibits
insets with typical stain shapes, and calibration performed in this
study (described in Supplementary documentation) identiﬁed the
limits between the three stain peripheral shapes with red and
green lines. Above the red line, inertia dominates the resisting
forces, and stains exhibit splashing in the form of smaller satellite
spatter stains surrounding the leading edge of the main stain, as
shown in the insets. Below the green line, inertia is lowest with
respect to resisting forces, and stains exhibit a smooth boundary,
symmetrical across their main axis. Between the red and the green
line, stains exhibit wavy, asymmetric deformations of their
boundaries. Note that a typical calibration process such as the
one performed in this study for smooth cardstock can be done for
other surfaces of interest to crime scene reconstruction. The
calibration process provides both the phase diagram in Fig. 2 and
the spreading Correlation (4) for a speciﬁc target surface.
For the model presented in this manuscript, the phase diagram of
Fig. 2 is used to narrow down the range of acceptable trial values of β.
Trial impact conditions that correspond to a stain periphery shape
different from that observed on the stain of interest are discarded.
Effectively, consideration of this criterion linking the morphology of
stain boundary with impact conditions reduces the range of impact
conditions to be used in trial trajectory calculations.
2.2.2. Probabilistic modeling
The probabilistic determination of the region of origin is
based on the principle of maximum likelihood [33], which
identiﬁes the region of origin around a point of highest
probability given our assumptions. The likelihood function is
then used to produce the region of origin as a conﬁdence
volume around that point with varying levels of probability.
Fig. 3 describes the method graphically, where the likely region
of convergence is ﬁrst determined in the probabilistic manner
of [10], and then the likely height above the region of
convergence is estimated. To ﬁrst determine the region of
convergence, the horizontal plane is discretized along its x–y
orthonormal directions with an array of points k, as in Fig. 3. A
probability density function (PDF) cik expresses the probability
density that the x–y projection of a trajectory from stain i passes
through point k. As in [10], the PDF is
cik ¼
1
Dui
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
exp  u2
ik
2Du2
i
  
!
; 
ð7Þ
where uikis the angle between the wall and the horizontal projection
of the segment between stain i and point k. The direction of the x–y
projection of the trajectory towards stain i is determined as,
ui ¼ p
2 þ arctan sinðgiÞ
tanðaiÞ
 

: 
ð8Þ
The uncertainty Dui (1/2 standard deviation) is determined
using the propagation of uncertainties, where E is the absolute
error in measuring the length L or width W of a stain as in [10],
Fig. 2. Phase diagram linking three different morphologies of stain boundaries
(smooth, wavy, and splashed) to the impact conditions in terms of dimensionless
numbers. Each symbol on the plot corresponds to a measurement of at least 10
drops. The color of the symbol identiﬁes the shape corresponding to the majority of
the stains of a given calibration measurement (splashed, wavy or smooth).
Dui ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
L4sin2g
ðL2  W2Þ  ½sin2gðL2  W2Þ þ W2

W2
L2 E2 þ E2 þ W2cos2g
L4sin2g
ðL2  W2Þ2ð@gÞ2
" 
#
v
u
u
t
: 
ð9Þ
326 
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331


--- PAGE 5 ---

Above, the uncertainty on the measurement of the directional
angle g 
(expressed in radians) is estimated from repeated
measurements as @g ¼ 0:07expð3:1aÞ. The above expression
assumes that the measurements of W, L and E are independent,
and is valid for (jgj 20; p½) and L > W. Simpler expressions for the
limit cases, g ¼ p
2
= , or, g ¼ 0, are in [10] and [34].
The second PDF, fik, describes the probability density that the
trajectory from stain i passes at a height z above point k. Because
there is no known criterion to prefer any trajectory among the ones
compatible with the two criterion of ﬂight breakup and stain
shape, we assign equal probability to any of those compatible
trajectories, using a uniform distribution. This uniform distribution
is shown below with Gaussian tails added to account for
trajectories with conditions narrowly close to the interval of
maximum probability and for the sake of numerical stability in the
maximum likelihood estimation as
fikðzÞ ¼
A; 
zmin  z  zmax
A
Dz exp 
1
2
zmin  z
Dz
 
2
	 

; 
z < zmin;
A
Dz exp 
1
2
z  zmax
Dz
 
2
	 

; 
z > zmax
8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:
ð10Þ
where A is a normalization constant, and Dz ¼ zmax  zmin is the
difference 
between 
the 
height 
of 
the 
highest 
and 
lowest
trajectories compatible with the ﬂight and stain shape criteria,
aimed at stain i above point k.
For N stains selected out of a blood spatter pattern, we can
calculate the likelihood ck that their trajectories transit above a
given point k on the ﬂoor as,
ck ¼
Y
N
i¼1
cik; 
ð11Þ
and the likelihood fkðzÞ that their trajectories pass at a given
height z over point k as,
fkðzÞ ¼
Y
N
i¼1
fikðzÞ: 
ð12Þ
Note that both deﬁnitions above assume that impact processes i
are independent from each other. In other words, each stain forms
independently from one another.
Then, the probability density function, f, that a blood spatter
pattern originates from a given location in 3D space (k, z), where k
refers to a position in the horizontal plane, is deﬁned as,
f ðk; zÞ ¼ Bck  fk z
ð Þ: 
ð13Þ
Using 
a 
normalization 
constant, 
B, 
the 
spatial 
location
maximizing f corresponds to the maximum likelihood of the
trajectories passing by that location. The probability that the region
of origin is within a given volume V can be expressed as,
P ¼
Z
V
f ðk; zÞdV: 
ð14Þ
Fig. 3 illustrates this method for the case where N = 2 stains.
To summarize, the main idea of the method is to ﬁrst determine
the region of convergence in a horizontal plane as the area most
compatiblewith projected trajectories (which are straight lines), and
then for every discretized point of the area of convergence, to
determine the range of height compatible with physical trajectories.
2.2.3. Implementation
Eight 
available 
digital 
spatter 
patterns 
scanned 
at 
high
resolution, and publicly available [5] are used as input for the
simulations. Their names, distance to the wall and velocity of the
impactor are in Table 1.
The reconstruction model presented in this manuscript is
implemented in the scientiﬁc computing language MATLAB [35]
version 2013b. Stains are automatically segmented (extracted as a
geometrical entity from their background), and ellipses are
automatically ﬁtted [36]. The equation of motion (1) are integrated
with the ordinary differential equation solver ‘ode 45’.
Note that per design, the angles g and a measured on a stain, i,
deﬁne the natural direction ui of the horizontal projection of the
trajectory, within the uncertainty Dui. To calculate trajectories
with horizontal projections in the vicinity of the projection of that
natural trajectory, it is necessary to perturb the trial impact
velocity, according to a procedure described in the supplementary
documentation.
Fig. 3. A probabilistic method to evaluate the region of origin of a blood spatter
pattern. Here, two stains i = 1,2 are illustrated in blue and orange, respectively, but
the method is compatible with large numbers of stains. From each stain, a range of
trial trajectories are reconstructed. Fluid dynamic principles guide the reconstruc-
tion and the range of trial trajectories (the faster trajectory in red, and the slower, in
black). The directional angle g is measured by stain inspection, and ui is the
direction of the drop trajectories projected on a horizontal plane. On the
horizontal plane, the likelihood c determines the location of the region of
convergence, and is obtained as a product of the probability density functions
(PDFs) of each stain ci. On the vertical axis, the likelihood fk determines the
height of the origin above point k of the region of convergence, and is
obtained as a product of the PDFs of each stain fik. The region of origin is
then 
constructed 
as 
a 
product 
of c 
and f. 
(For 
interpretation 
of 
the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend and text, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
Table 1
Description of the spatter patterns used in this study, representing a range of impact
conditions. Name refers to [5], which provides high-resolution pictures and
experimental details of each spatter pattern.
Name 
Distance
blood source
to target
wall, x0, cm
Velocity of
impactor, m/s
Type of impact
C9 (slow impact, blood
source far from the wall)
120 
2.4 
Two ﬂat
surfaces
colliding
HP 31 (fast impact, blood
source close to wall)
30 
7.8 
Rod hitting ﬂat
surface
HP 7 
60 
5.2
HP 53 
60 
7.8
HP 30 
60 
7.8
HP 11 
120 
5.2
HP 24 
120 
7.8
HP 21 
190 
7.8
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331 
327


--- PAGE 6 ---

For each spatter pattern, a set of about 40 stains were
automatically and randomly selected for reconstruction purposes.
The criteria for stain selection were: (1) stains located at least at a
given horizontal distance (8% of the horizontal distance between
blood source and target) from the centroid of the spatter pattern;
(2) stains with ellipticity corresponding to an impact angle
between 40 and 75, corresponding to the available calibration
data described in Supplementary documentation; (3) stains that
minimize the uncertainty on the angle ui as per Eqs. (9) and (4) half
the stains with splashing features, and half without, in an attempt
to use information from a variety of regions in the phase diagram of
Fig. 2. Manual supervision together with automatic comparison of
the stain shape with an ellipse were then used to eliminate stains
with shapes far remote from ellipses, as it sometimes occurs when
multiple stains impact on top of each other, or stains with satellite
features that could not be clearly attributed to the stain considered
or to neighboring stains. Pictures of selected stains are saved, to
preserve the possibility to compare the method at hand with other
bloodstain pattern analysis software such as e.g. Hemospat [8]. All
the spatter patterns used in this work are available in an open-
access dataset [5], in high-resolution, so that other methods of
reconstruction or stain selection can be compared with the one
presented here.
3. Results and discussion
Reconstruction results are shown and discussed in this section
in the following order: (1) reconstruction results of two spatter
patterns representing a wide range of conditions: fast impact close
to the wall for Fig. 4 and slow impact far from the wall for Fig. 5; (2)
Fig. 4. Reconstructionof trajectories for spatterpatternHP31, correspondingto afastimpact,closefromthewall (xo = 30 cm). 3D view(a), topview(b), side view(c), and viewfrom
the stained wall (d) of the trajectories and the region of origin. The region of origin is represented as concentric volumes, where red, green and blue colors correspond to
probability values P of 90%, 99% and 99.9%, respectively. Trajectories with the highest energy are in red, and trajectories with the lowest energy are in black. The known origin is
shown by a white disk with a red cross. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend and text, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
328 
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331


--- PAGE 7 ---

uncertainty and error associated with the eight spatter patterns in
Table 1, and comparison with state of the art; (3) discussion of the
implications for crime scene documentation.
Fig. 4describes views of the reconstruction results for spatter
pattern HP 31, corresponding to a fast impact close to the wall, with
symbols explained in the ﬁgure caption. Trajectories for each stains
have been calculated backward, and are plotted between the impact
location (x = 0 m) and the location of the known blood source shown
as a red cross in a white disk (xo, yo, zo). The trajectories in red are
almost straight, because they correspond to the highest impact
energy compatible with the stain shape and size. The black
trajectories are visibly curved, and correspond to the lowest impact
energy compatible with the stain shape and size. The volume of the
region of origin can be calculated according to Eq. (14). For a
probability P = 99.9%, the region of origin has a volume of 0.11 L,
which is about a tenth of that of a grapefruit, a commonly used
estimate of the volume of the region of origin. Note that some stains
pointing downwards are also considered in the reconstruction.
Reconstruction results for an impact slower with an origin far
away from the wall, are in Fig. 5. The volume of the region of origin
increases drastically. Here the region of origin has a volume of 95 L,
which correspond to about 93 grapefruits or 13 basketballs —
another proposed estimate of the volume of the region of origin
[14]. Interestingly, the major uncertainty is along the vertical axis.
Similarly to the previous result, some stains pointing downwards
are also considered in the reconstruction.
Similar reconstruction efforts have been undertaken with the
six other spatter patterns referenced in Table 1. The volume of the
region of origin, which corresponds to the uncertainty in the
determination of the origin, is plotted in Fig. 6 using Eq. (14), with
the values of the PDF that correspond to blue, green or red region of
origin in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 reveals that the uncertainty VRO is
proportional to the distance x0 between source and wall at a
power of about ﬁve,
VRO  xn
O; with 5:2  n  5:5: 
ð15Þ
Fig. 5. Results for spatter pattern C9, corresponding to a slow impact, far from the wall (xo = 120 cm). Axes and colors are the same as in Fig. 4.
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331 
329


--- PAGE 8 ---

The above estimate conﬁrms that the volume of the region of origin
has a strong dependence on the distance from the wall. This value can
be explained because the uncertainty in either horizontal direction
grows linearly with the distance xO as Dx 	 xo, andDy 	 xo, while
the uncertainty in the vertical direction grows as Dz 	 gt2=2.
Assuming a steady horizontal velocity u of the drop, the travel time
t 	 xO=u. 
Combining 
the 
two 
latter assumptions 
results 
in
Dz 	 gx2
o= 2u2
 
. 
Thus 
a 
rough estimate 
of 
the 
uncertainty
VRO ﬃ Dx  Dy  Dz 	 x4
o. Numerically, the exponent of the power
law in Eq. (15) is about ﬁve. Also, the assumption of Dz is inversely
proportional to the square of the velocity, which indicates that
selecting stains generated from faster drops might decrease
reconstruction uncertainty. Note that in both spatter patterns
reconstructed in the above ﬁgures, some stains pointing down-
wards are considered, while these are typically excluded from
height reconstruction using traditional reconstruction methods.
Besides the uncertainty on the determination of the region of
origin, we can also determine its error. The error in the
determination of the region of origin is deﬁned in the classical
manner [37] as the difference between the estimated and the
known region of origin of a spatter pattern. Here, it is calculated as
the smallest vector between the determined region of origin and
the known region of origin. Fig. 7 plots the absolute values of the
horizontal (dx) and vertical (dz) components of this error,
assuming a probability P = 99%, as a function of the horizontal
distance between blood source and wall. Typically, dx is negative
(the source is found closer to the wall), and dz is positive (the
source is found higher than it actual location). The error of the
present method, at least with the eight spatter patterns studied, is
always smaller than 10 cm, and does not grow with the distance
from the wall. Although typically negligible in a crime scene, and
independent of the distance from the wall, the error is not always
zero. This means that with the present method, the known region
of origin is not always within the determined region of origin.
Possible reasons for this are: the assumption that ellipticity exactly
determines the impact angle (Eq. (3)), no matter the stain size or
impact energy; the equations of motion (Eq. (1)) that neglects
interactions between drops; the drag coefﬁcient that neglects
oscillations of drops, while considering their steady deformation;
and the fact that atomization occurs over a volume rather than a
speciﬁc point. From the eight spatter patterns examined, it appears
that the present method does not exhibit a systematic bias or error.
A comparison is made with a systematic study [38] on the sources
of error in reconstruction using straight trajectories. Since no peer-
reviewed results could be found for spatter patterns more than one
meter away from the wall, additional reconstruction results
assuming straight trajectories obtained by participants to a
workshop given by the ﬁrst author are also plotted in green.
The data points obtained while assuming straight trajectories (in
yellow and green) are averaged from several trials. In comparison,
the method of strings shows a systematic error in the determina-
tion of the height: the determined height is higher than the known
height. This bias is well known by BPA researchers and practi-
tioners [6,39]. Another contribution of the present method is to
estimate the uncertainty associated with the reconstruction of a
speciﬁc spatter pattern.
Should the above method be used on a crime scene, two
recommendations for crime scene documentation should be
stated. Since the method relies on inspection of the stain
boundaries, it is important to photograph stains with the highest
possible resolution. In this study, a resolution of 600 dots per inch
was used. Using a macro-lens and a state-of-the-art digital camera,
resolutions of the same order can been reached by stitching [40]
multiple images of small areas (O(10 cm 
 10 cm)). Protocols for
reliable stitching and for quality illumination in the macro-
photography process – where the camera objective is close to the
object – would have to be designed. Also, the transitions between
stain shapes depend on the blood and target material on which
stains are found, which has implications in documentation and
preservation of evidence. Until reliable calibration data is provided,
we recommend that investigators collect samples of the target
surface of interest and hematocrit measurements. Note also that in
a real crime scene, it is not uncommon that the blood source moves
during the generation of the blood spatter. That fact will add
additional uncertainty in the determination of the region of origin.
4. Conclusion
In this study, we propose a novel method based on sound ﬂuid
dynamics and a probabilistic approach to determine the region of
origin of the impact blood spatter patterns associated with
Fig. 6. Volume of the region of origin as a function of the horizontal distance
between blood source and wall, as determined by the reconstruction method
presented in this manuscript. Parameter P is the value of the probability value used
to deﬁne the region of origin, Eq. (14).
Fig. 7. Error in the determination of the region of origin as a function of the
horizontal distance between blood source and wall, as determined by the
reconstruction method presented in this manuscript. For comparison, results using
reconstruction methods assuming straight trajectories are also plotted.
330 
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331


--- PAGE 9 ---

beatings. The method is based on the inspection of high-resolution
images of the spatter patterns, where the presence or absence of
splashing traces at the periphery of drops is used to narrow down
the possible range of impact conditions. A range of spatter patterns
with various impact energies and distances between the source
and spatter pattern is reconstructed with the proposed method.
The region of origin of a blood spatter pattern is quantiﬁed in the
form of a volume surrounding the most likely point of origin,
determined 
by 
propagating 
the 
uncertainties 
due 
to 
stain
measurements. The method presented here allows a rational
and case-related estimate of the uncertainty associated with
trajectory reconstruction. The statistical framework is ﬂexible and
general enough to accommodate current and future advances in
the ﬂuid dynamics of blood spatter patterns. Our results suggest
that uncertainty grows with a power ﬁve of the distance between
the spatter pattern and the target, and can reach more than the
traditional estimate of the volume of a grapefruit or a basketball.
The proposed method allows the consideration of stains pointing
downwards. It is the belief of the authors that the proposed
reconstruction method can be used to prescribe recommendations
on crime scene documentation. Future work will focus on
providing calibration data for other target surfaces relevant to
crime scenes, and on transitioning this reconstruction method
from an academic exercise to a tool useful for crime scene
reconstructions.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the US National
Institute of Justice (Award No. NIJ 2014-DN-BX-K036). This work was
also partially funded by the Center for Statistics and Applications in
Forensic Evidence (CSAFE) through Cooperative Agreement No.
70NANB15H176 between NIST and Iowa State University, which
includes activities carried out at Carnegie Mellon University,
University of California Irvine, and University of Virginia. We
acknowledge the contribution of Prashant Agrawal, John Polansky
and Zaki Jubery in speciﬁc aspects of the numerical implementation;
useful discussions with Craig Moore; as well as the participants from
the Swiss scientiﬁc police force to a workshop on the ﬂuid dynamics
of BPA in summer 2016 for reconstruction of spatters in Fig. 7.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the
online version, at doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2019.02.003.
References
[1] P.L. Kirk, Crime Investigation: physical evidence and the police laboratory,
Blood, Physical Investigation, Interscience Publishers, 1953, pp. 176–203.
[2] P.R. De Forest, R.E. Gaensslen, H.C. Lee, Forensic Science: An Introduction to
Criminalistics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.
[3] Terms and Deﬁnitions in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, ASB Technical Report
033, ﬁrst ed., (2017) .
[4] V. Balthazard, R. Piedelievre, H. Desoille, L. Dérobert, Etude des gouttes de sang
projeté, XXIIe congrès de médicine légale de langue francaise, (1939) Paris.
[5] D. Attinger, Y. Liu, T. Bybee, K. De Brabanter, A data set of bloodstain patterns
for teaching and research in bloodstain pattern analysis: impact beating
spatters, Data Brief 18 (2018) 648–654.
[6] T. Bevel, R.M. Gardner, Bloodstain Pattern Analysis with an Introduction to
Crime Scene Reconstruction, third ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2008.
[7] A.L. Carter, M. Illes, K. Maloney, A.B. Yamashita, B. Allen, B. Brown, L. Davidson,
G. Ellis, J. Gallant, A. Gradkowski, J. Hignell, S. Jory, P.L. Laturnus, C.C. Moore, R.
Pembroke, A. Richard, R. Spenard, C. Stewart, Further validation of the
BackTrack(TM) computer program for bloodstain pattern analysis: precision
and accuracy, Int. Assoc. Bloodstain Pattern Anal. News 21 (3) (2005) 15–22.
[8] K. Maloney, J. Killeen, A. Maloney, The use of HemoSpat to include bloodstains
located on nonorthogonal surfaces in area of origin calculations, J. Forensic
Identif. 59 (5) (2009) 513.
[9] A.L. Carter, The directional analysis of bloodstain patterns: theory and
experimental validation, J. Can. Soc. Forensic Sci. 34 (4) (2001) 173–173.
[10] F. Camana, Determining the area of convergence in Bloodstain Pattern
Analysis: A probabilistic approach, Forensic Sci. Int. 1–3 (September (231))
(2013) 131–136.
[11] D. Attinger, C. Moore, A. Donaldson, A. Jafari, H.A. Stone, Fluid dynamics topics
in bloodstain pattern analysis: comparative review and research opportu-
nities, Forensic Sci. Int. 231 (1–3) (2013) 375–396 (in English).
[12] Committee on Identifying the Needs of the Forensic Sciences Community,
National 
Research 
Council 
(National 
Research 
Council), 
Strengthening
Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward, The National Academies
Press, Washington, DC, 2009. https://doi.org/10.17226/12589.
[13] N. Behrooz, L. Hulse-Smith, S. Chandra, An evaluation of the underlying
mechanisms of bloodstain pattern analysis error, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (September
(5)) (2011) 1136–1142.
[14] H.L. MacDonell, Bloodstain Patterns, second ed., Laboratory of Forensic
Sciences, Corning, NY USA, 2005.
[15] U. Buck, B. Kneubuehl, S. Näther, N. Albertini, L. Schmidt, M. Thali, 3D
bloodstain pattern analysis: ballistic reconstruction of the trajectories of blood
drops and determination of the centres of origin of the bloodstains (in
English), Forensic Sci. Int. 206 (March (1–3)) (2011) 22–28.
[16] P.A. Pizzola, J.M. Buszka, N. Marin, N.D.K. Petraco, P.R. De Forest, Commentary
on “3D bloodstain pattern analysis: ballistic reconstruction of the trajectories
of blood drops and determination of the centres of origin of the bloodstains”
by Buck et al. [Forensic Sci. Int. 206 (2011) 22–28] (in English), Forensic Sci. Int.
Lett. 220 (2012) e39–e40.
[17] C.R. Varney, F. Gittes, Locating the source of projectile ﬂuid droplets, Am. J.
Phys. 79 (8) (2011) 838–842.
[18] P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, D. Attinger, High-speed video analysis of forward
and backward spattered blood droplets, Forensic Sci. Int. 276 (2017) 134–141.
[19] N. Laan, K.G. de Bruin, D. Slenter, J. Wilhelm, M. Jermy, D. Bonn, Bloodstain
pattern analysis: implementation of a ﬂuid dynamic model for position
determination of victims, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 11461.
[20] D. Attinger, Development of a Science Base and Open Source Software for
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, Final Technical Report 2010-DN-BX-K403, (2016) .
[21] P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, S. Kim, D. Attinger, Prediction of blood back spatter
from a gunshot in bloodstain pattern analysis, Phys. Rev. Fluids 1 (4) (2016)
043201.
[22] G.M. Faeth, L.P. Hsiang, P.K. Wu, Structure and breakup properties of sprays, Int.
J. Multiph.Flow 21 (December) (1995) 99–127.
[23] M. Vargas, Drag Coefﬁcient of Water Droplets Approaching the Leading Edge of
an Airfoil, 5th AIAA Atmospheric and Space Environments Conference (2013)
1–23, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2514/6.2013-3054.
[24] R.P. Sahu, S. Sett, A.L. Yarin, B. Pourdeyhimi, Impact of aqueous suspension
drops onto non-wettable porous membranes: hydrodynamic focusing and
penetration of nanoparticles, Colloids Surf. A 467 (2015) 31–45.
[25] B.L. Scheller, D.W. Bousﬁeld, Newtonian drop impact with a solid surface,
AICHE J. 41 (6) (1995) 1357–1367.
[26] C.D. Adam, Fundamental studies of bloodstain formation and characteristics
(in English), Forensic Sci. Int. 219 (2012) 76–87.
[27] S. Kim, Y. Ma, P. Agrawal, D. Attinger, How important is it to consider target
properties and hematocrit in bloodstain pattern analysis? Forensic Sci. Int. 266
(2016) 178–184.
[28] M. Pasandideh-Fard, Y.M. Qiao, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Capillary effects
during droplet impact on a solid surface, Phys. Fluids 8 (1996) 650–659.
[29] L.P. Hsiang, G.M. Faeth, Near-limit drop deformation and secondary breakup,
Int. J. Multiphase Flow 18 (September (5)) (1992) 635–652.
[30] L. Hulse-Smith, N.Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, Deducing drop size and impact
velocity from circular bloodstains, J. Forensic Sci. 50 (1) (2005) 54–63.
[31] C. Mundo, M. Sommerfeld, C. Tropea, Droplet-wall collisions: experimental
studies of the deformation and breakup process, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 21
(1995) 151–173.
[32] J.C. Bird, S.S.H. Tsai, H.A. Stone, Inclined to splash: triggering and inhibiting a
splash with tangential velocity, New J. Phys. 11 (6) (2009) 1–11 063017.
[33] J.A. Rice, Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis, third ed., Brooks/Cole,
2007.
[34] C. Willis, A.K. Piranian, J.R. Donaggio, R.J. Barnett, W.F. Rowe, Errors in the
estimation of the distance of fall and angles of impact blood drops (in English),
Forensic Sci. Int. 123 (November (1)) (2001) 1–4.
[35] G. Recktenwald, Numerical Methods with Matlab: Implementations and
Applications, Prentice-Hall, Upper-Saddle River, NJ, 2000.
[36] P.M. Comiskey, A.L. Yarin, D. Attinger, Hydrodynamics of back spatter by blunt
bullet gunshot with a link to bloodstain pattern analysis, Phys. Rev. Fluids 2 (7)
(2017) 073906.
[37] E.O. Doebelin, Measurement Systems: Application and Design, McGraw-Hill,
2004.
[38] K.G. de Bruin, R.D. Stoel, J.C.M. Limborgh, Improving the point of origin
determination in bloodstain pattern analysis, J. Forensic Sci. 56 (6) (2011)
1476–1482.
[39] S.H. James, P.E. Kish, T.P. Sutton, Principles of Bloodstain Pattern Analysis:
Theory and Practice, CRC Press, 2005.
[40] S. Siu, J. Pender, F. Springer, F. Tulleners, W. Ristenpart, Quantitative
differentiation of bloodstain patterns resulting from gunshot and blunt force
impacts (in English), J. Forensic Sci. (Februry) (2017) 1–14.
D. Attinger et al. / Forensic Science International 298 (2019) 323–331 
331
